JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

You may be trying to access this site from a secured browser on the
server. Please enable scripts and reload this page.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

::: section
-   
-    or
-   Register
-    Subscribe to journal Subscribe
-    Get new issue alerts Get alerts
:::

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

### Journal Logo

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

Articles

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Advanced Search

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

-    Browsing History
-   Articles & Issues
-    Collections
-   For Authors
-   Journal Info

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

February 2010 - Volume 53 - Issue

</div>

<div>

-    Previous Article
-    Next Article

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

-    **Outline**
-    **Images**
-    **Download**
-    **Cite**
-    **Share**
-    **Favorites**
-    **Permissions**
-   

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

::: section
<div>

Supplement Article

</div>
:::

<div>

# Genetic and Epidemiologic Characterization of HIV-1 Infection In Liaoning Province, China

</div>

::: section
Han, Xiaoxu MD ^\*^ ; Dai, Di MS ^\*^ ; Zhao, Bin MS ^\*^ ; Liu, Jing MS
^\*^ ; Ding, Haibo BS ^\*^ ; Zhang, Min MD ^\*^ ; Hu, Qinghai BS ^\*^ ;
Lu, Chunming BS ^†^ ; Goldin, Mark BS ^‡^ ; Takebe, Yutaka MD, PhD ^§^ ;
Zhang, Linqi PhD ^‖^ ; Shang, Hong MD, PhD ^\*^

::: section
Author Information
:::
:::

::: section
:::

::: section
<div>

JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 53():p S27-S33,
February 2010. \| DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181c7d5bf

</div>
:::

::: section
-    Free

Metrics
:::

::: section
## Abstract

<div>

<div>

<div>

### Background:

Although many studies of HIV-1 in China have focused on high-risk
injecting drug users and former blood donors in high prevalence regions,
little is known about HIV-1 in relatively low prevalence provinces.
Here, we compare the epidemiologic and genetic profile of HIV-1 in
Liaoning-a low prevalence province-with those identified in China\'s
most severely affected provinces.

### Materials and Methods:

Two hundred eight HIV-1-positive subjects from all major cities in
Liaoning province were recruited between 2000 and 2008. 2.6 kilobase
gag-pol sequences were amplified from plasma viral RNA and sequenced
directly. The HIV-1 sequences obtained were analyzed using phylogenetic
and recombinant approaches.

### Results:

We have shown that in recent years, although HIV-1 prevalence in
Liaoning has remained low, the rate of new infection has increased
rapidly, particularly among men who have sex with men and heterosexual
risk individuals (together comprising \>54% of infected individuals in
2007). Furthermore, phylogenetic analysis has identified all major
subtypes/circulating recombinant forms of HIV-1 in Liaoning previously
identified in high prevalence provinces. Our study also shows close
relationships between HIV-1 subtype/circulating recombinant form and
certain risk behaviors. Notably, men who have sex with men and
heterosexual risk individuals harbor most divergent strains of HIV-1
from multiple high-risk groups.

### Conclusions:

Our study suggested that HIV-1 continues to spread to the general
population through sexual contact; Liaoning, therefore, serves as the
critical base for the introduction and spread of HIV-1 in northeast
China. We believe the transmission patterns suggested herein will help
guide public health workers in reducing further spread of HIV-1 within
China.

</div>

</div>

</div>
:::

<div>

::: section
## INTRODUCTION

The HIV-1/AIDS epidemic in China is at a critical juncture. Although
HIV-1 infection has historically been largely confined to high-risk
groups such as injecting drug users (IDUs) and former commercial blood
and plasma donors (FBDs) in rural areas, ^1,2^ the rate of HIV-1
infection has been increasing rapidly in urban settings among men who
have sex with men (MSM) and female sex workers. This is a worrisome
trend previously seen in other Asian countries. ^3,4^

The current epidemic in China can be broadly classified into 2 major
risk groups. The first major risk group arose from injecting drug use
and needle sharing in Yunnan province, and along drug-trafficking routes
to the neighboring provinces of Guangxi, Guizhou, and Sichuan and to the
far northwest province of Xinjiang. ^3^ The second group arose from
illegal and unsanitary blood collection and transfusion practices among
FBDs in Henan and neighboring provinces. ^1,2^ This typically involved
the pooling of blood from several donors of the same blood type,
followed by the removal of plasma and the reinfusion of cells back into
the original donors to reduce anemia. ^1,2^ Contamination of these
pooled samples with HIV-1, along with needle reuse and unsterilized
equipment, greatly enhanced viral transmission. Epidemiologic and
molecular genetic studies indicate that both of these 2 epidemic groups
stemmed from the initial infection of Dai and Jingpo ethnic minority
IDUs in southwest Yunnan province in the late 1980s. ^5-11^ IDUs and
FBDs represent the first and worst affected populations in the HIV-1
epidemic in China.

Although there exist many HIV-1 epidemiologic and genetic studies of
these 2 major groups, ^3,7-16^ little is known about the situation in
relatively low prevalence provinces. As such, we aim to study the
epidemiologic and genetic features of HIV-1 in a low prevalence
region-Liaoning province of northeast China-and compare with those
identified in China\'s most severely affected provinces. We believe that
our study will not only help to monitor the transmission patterns of
HIV-1 from high to relatively low prevalence areas but also assist
public health workers in implementing measures to curb the spread of
HIV-1 within China.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Study Subjects and Specimens

A total of 208 HIV-1-positive subjects from all major cities in Liaoning
province were recruited between 2000 and 2008 by the First Affiliated
Hospital China Medical University in Shenyang, Liaoning Province, in
northeastern China. These included 109 cases from Shenyang, 31 from
Huludao, 20 from Dalian, 16 from Dandong, 6 from Fushun, 4 cases from
Chaoyang, Panjin, Tieling, and Yingkou, 3 cases from Anshan and
Liaoyang, 2 cases from Jinzhou, and 1 case from Benxi and Fuxin ( Fig. 1
). This study was approved by the institution\'s ethical committee, and
the study participants were interviewed by clinicians to determine their
epidemiologic background, using questionnaires designed by the UNAIDS
HIV-1 characterization network. This information was then verified with
that from the HIV patient management database in the Hospital. Study
subjects included 70 individuals with heterosexual risk, 52 FBDs or
transfusion recipients, 10 IDUs, 75 male homosexuals, and 1 child born
to an HIV-infected mother. Two hundred six of 208 subjects were adults
(\>15 years old), including 165 males and 41 females. Adult subject age
data were obtained for 93.4% males (range: 19-69 years; mean: 36.4 ±
10.1 years) and 92.3% females (range: 18-58 years; mean: 35.1 ± 10.4
years). The 2 subjects \<15 years old (4 and 14 years old) were males.
All 208 specimens were serologically determined as HIV-1 positive with
no evidence of HIV-2 infections. Baseline CD4 ^+^ T-cell count was
obtained for 95.2% male subjects (mean: 356 ± 243 cells/μL) and 100%
female subjects (mean: 405 ± 243 cells/μL), and baseline HIV-1 viral
load was obtained for 73% male subjects (mean: 4.68 ± 0.95 × 103
lgcopies/mL) and 92.3% female subjects (mean: 4.65 ± 0.95 × 103
lgcopies/mL). All patients were treatment-naive at the point of sample
collection.

::: section
<figure>

<figcaption><span>FIGURE 1:</span>
<div>
Map of the People's Republic of China (A) and Liaoning province (B), and
the geographic distribution of studied HIV-1-infected cases in Liaoning.
</div></figcaption>
</figure>
:::

### RNA Purification, Polymerase Chain Reaction Amplification, Sequencing, and Phylogenetic Analysis

HIV-1 RNA was extracted from plasma by a column purification method
(QIAamp. Viral RNA Mini Kit; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and subjected to
reverse transcription-nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The
nucleotide sequence of the 2.6 kilobase *gag* reverse transcriptase (RT)
gene (nucleotide position relative to HXB2 genome: 790-3421) was
determined by direct sequencing (ABI PRISM. 3130 Genetic Analyzer,
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The PCR primer-binding sites for
the ampilcon were based on published sequences of geographical variants
and were as highly conserved as possible. Codon alignment of query
sequences with various HIV-1 reference subtypes and circulating
recombinant form (CRFs) from the HIV database ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/
) was performed. Selected HIV-1 subtypes/CRFs of geographical importance
were also included in the alignment. Phylogenetic and molecular
evolutionary distances were estimated using the neighbor-joining method
and the Kimura 2-parameter model with a transition-transversion ratio of
2.0. The reliability of the branching orders was tested by bootstrap
analysis of 1000 replicates. Bootscanning, similarity plots and
informative site analysis were performed using SimPlot v3.5 to define
the recombination structure. All RNA extractions and PCR amplifications
were carried out with appropriate negative controls to detect possible
contamination during the procedure. To check for potential
contamination, before analysis, the sequences obtained were compared
with all known sequences in the HIV database by a Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) search ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/content/index ).

### Nucleotide Sequence Accession Numbers

The Genbank accession numbers of nucleotide sequences reported in this
article are EF122502-EF122594, AY548279, and FJ531381-FJ531481.

## RESULTS

### The HIV-1/AIDS Epidemic in Liaoning

Liaoning province is located in the northeastern part of China ( Fig. 1
), the region traditionally referred to as Manchuria. Its geographic
proximity to the Yellow Sea, the Bohai Gulf, and the Yalu River has made
it an important base for industry and trade and it serves as the closest
gateway to the Korean Peninsula. Administratively, Liaoning has a total
of 14 counties and cities, of which the capital Shenyang is the largest
( Fig. 1 ). Liaoning has an estimated population of 42 million, with Han
as the ethnic majority (84%), followed by Manchu (13%), and Mongol (2%).
The remaining 1% consists of Hui, Korean, and Xibo minorities.

Since the first HIV case was identified in Liaoning in 1991, a total of
990 HIV/AIDS cases had been reported by 2007. Although the cumulative
number of HIV/AIDS cases remains relatively small, the rate of new case
identification has increased rapidly in recent years. Although only 77
cases were found in 2004, 159 cases were identified in 2005, 216 cases
in 2006, and 305 cases in 2007 ( Fig. 2 ). This translates to an average
annual rate of increase of approximately 60% over the last 3 years.
Based on these reported cases, it is estimated that the total number of
infected cases in Liaoning is about 5239, with province-wide prevalence
rate of 0.0125%.

::: section
<figure>

<figcaption><span>FIGURE 2:</span>
<div>
Accumulative reported HIV-1-infected cases in Liaoning between 1991 and
2007.
</div></figcaption>
</figure>
:::

The recent increase in reported cases is also characterized by dramatic
changes in risk factor distribution among infected individuals. Most
notably, the proportion of cases transmitted through homosexual contact
increased to 22% between 2005 and 2007 compared with less than 1% in the
previous years ( Fig. 2 , inset). On the other hand, the proportion of
cases transmitted through blood donation and transfusion decreased from
34% to 8% during the same period. Other risk factors such as injection
drug use (IDU), mother to child transmission, and heterosexual contact
have contributed relatively stable proportions to the total. Of note,
individuals with unknown risk factors have contributed a substantial
proportion of the total throughout the years ( Fig. 2 , inset).

The rapid increase in MSM-related infections is a significant feature of
the changing epidemiologic profile of HIV-1 in Liaoning. Although the
HIV-1 prevalence rates among the IDU, female sex worker, and STD (out
patients attending sexually transmitted disease clinics) groups remain
relatively low and stable (below 0.5%) between 1999 and 2007, there is a
6-fold increase for MSM in 2006 and 2007, according to data from the
Disease Control and Prevention center of Liaoning Province. Furthermore,
more than 65% of infected cases are male. On average, \>80% of infected
individuals have been aged 20-40 years.

Although such dramatic increases in reported HIV/AIDS cases are
primarily due to the active testing initiative launched by national and
provincial health authorities in 2004, these could also indicate an
expansion of the epidemic in Liaoning. Indeed, differentiating new
infections from newly identified chronic infections will require more
sophisticated techniques.

### Different Risk Groups Dominated by Distinct Subtypes of HIV-1

To study the pattern of distribution of HIV-1 genotypes, we obtained 208
nucleotide sequences encompassing the *gag* RT gene. A phylogenetic
approach was used to study the relationships among HIV-1 strains within
Liaoning and with those from outside. The most obvious and consistent
result from phylogenetic analysis was that there are 3 major subtypes
and/or CRFs of HIV-1 currently circulating in Liaoning. They are those
clustering closely with reference sequences CRF01_AE (01 AE.TH.90.CM240)
or CRF15_01B (15 01B.TH.99.MU2079); those with subtype B
(B.FR.83HXB2-LAI-IIIBBRU) or B\' (B.CN.RL42); and those with subtype C
(C.IN.95.21068) or reference sequences CRF07_BC (07 BC.CN.97.CN54) or
CRF08_BC (08 BC.CN.97.GX 6F). Approximately 43.3% of collected sequences
were found in the CRF01_AE/CRF15_01B group, 41.3% in the subtype B/B\'
group, and 9.6% in the C/CRF07_BC/CRF08_BC group. The remaining 5.8%
belong to other subtypes such as A1 or A2 or unknown recombinants. Of
note, about 90.0% of infected IDUs had C/CRF07_BC/CRF08_BC viruses,
whereas 92.3% of infections acquired through blood donation had subtype
B or B\', and 81.3% of MSM had CRF01_AE ( Fig. 3A ). The heterosexual
contact risk group showed a variety of subtypes, with 37.1% subtype B or
B\', 12.9% CRF07_BC or CRF08_BC, 37.1% CRF01_AE, and the remaining 12.9%
other subtypes ( Fig. 3A ). Furthermore, more than 96% of CRF01_AE
infections were acquired through sexual transmission (67.8% MSM, 28.9%
heterosexual risk) ( Fig. 3B ). Subtypes B and B\', on the other hand,
are strongly associated with blood donation (55.8%) and heterosexual
contact (30.2%) and only weakly so with MSM (14.0%). Lastly, CRF07_BC
and CRF08_BC are dominant in both the heterosexual contact (45.0%) and
IDU (45.0%) risk groups ( Fig. 3B ).

::: section
<figure>

<figcaption><span>FIGURE 3:</span>
<div>
Correlation between risk factors and HIV-1 subtypes and CRF. A,
Percentage of viral subtypes and CRF in each of risk group studied; and
B, Percentage of risk groups in each of the viral subtype and CRF.
</div></figcaption>
</figure>
:::

### Close Genetic Relationship Between HIV-1 Found in Liaoning and Those in High Prevalence Provinces and Regions

We have generated independent phylogenetic trees for the 3 major
Liaoning HIV subtypes and CRFs; each of which is indicated by symbols
corresponding to their known risk factor: homosexual (open triangle),
heterosexual (closed triangle), IDU (closed square), and PBD/BT (closed
circle). For clarity, only a few representative sequences from each risk
groups are shown, together with reference sequences from different HIV-1
subtypes ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/content/index ). As shown in Fig. 4 ,
sequences identified in Liaoning have a close genetic relationship with
those previously found in Henan, Guangxi, and Yunnan provinces. For
instance, sequences in the AE group are interdigitized with those
identified in Guangxi (01 AE.CN.97.GX2F) and in neighboring Thailand (01
AE.TH.90.CM240). Although those found in heterosexual contact (closed
triangle) are spread along many branches, most MSM (open triangle)
sequences stem from a single branch, suggesting a close relationship
among MSM in Liaoning ( Fig. 4 ). This group contains sequences from
both MSM and heterosexual risk individuals. The genetic distance within
this group is as low as 0.027, suggesting the MSM and heterosexual
contact groups are tightly linked. This finding perhaps relates to the
fact that most of the MSM in China are bisexual and married with family.

::: section
<figure>

<figcaption><span>FIGURE 4:</span>
<div>
Neighbor-joining trees showing the 3 major circulating HIV-1 subtypes
and CRF in Liaoning and their genetic relationship with those identified
in high prevalence provinces. Individual sequences are indicated by
symbols corresponding to their known risk factor: homosexual (open
triangle), heterosexual (closed triangle), IDU (closed square), and FBD
(closed circle). For clarity only a few representative sequences from
each risk groups are shown, together with reference sequences from
different HIV-1 subtypes ( <span>
<span>http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/content/index</span> </span> ). The
bootstrap values of 1000 replicates are labeled on the major branches.
</div></figcaption>
</figure>
:::

Sequences in the subtype B/B\' group are mostly clustered with B\'
sequences previously identified in China. Of the 2 groups of B\'
sequences, 1 group is related to the more recent sequences identified in
Henan (B.CN.02.HNsq4) and Hubei (B.CN.05.HB dw111), whereas the other
group is related to early epidemic sequences found in Yunnan
(B.CN.x.RL42). As in the AE group, individuals infected through
heterosexual contact have sequences scattered along many branches in
both B and B\' groups, whereas those from FBD are derived from a single
branch, suggesting the tight relationship among blood donors in Liaoning
and their genetic relatedness with those from those high prevalence
provinces. In addition, sequences from blood donors are tightly grouped
with those from heterosexual risk individuals ( Fig. 4 ), and their
genetic distance is as low as 0.038. This result may indicate that HIV-1
has begun to spread from the traditionally high-risk blood donor
population to some in the general public through heterosexual contact.
Lastly, some MSM were also found to have subtype B sequences similar to
typical North American strains such as B.FR.83.HXB2-LAI-IIIB-BRU.

Sequences in the BC groups fall into 2 previously identified recombinant
forms, CRF07_BC and CRF08_BC ( Fig. 4 ). They are predominately
comprised of IDUs (closed square) and heterosexual risk individuals
(closed triangle) and are genetically indistinguishable from those
previously identified in Yunnan (07 BC.CN.97.CN54), Guangxi (08
BC.CN.97.GX.6F), and India (C.IN.95.21068) ( Fig. 4 ). One sequence
loosely groups with subtype C, and its true subtype assignment needs to
be further verified.

### Recombinant Forms of HIV-1 Found in Liaoning Similar to Those Found in High Prevalence Provinces and Regions

We analyzed 62 HIV-1 sequences from Liaoning spanning the entire 2.6
kilobase *gag* RT gene (nucleotide position relative to HXB2 genome:
790-3421). Consistent with phylogenetic analysis, all CRF08_BC or
CRF07_BC viruses had typical recombination features similar to those
previously reported from Guangxi and Yunnan ( Fig. 5 ). None of the
CRF01_AE sequences showed any intersubtype recombination in the fragment
studied. However, 1 sequence was found that is likely a new subtype
CRF01_AE/B recombinant ( Fig. 5 ). Further studies will be needed to
characterize this strain in the context of full viral genome.

::: section
<figure>

<figcaption><span>FIGURE 5:</span>
<div>
Bootscanning Analysis of HIV-1 gag-reverse transcriptase Sequences of 62
study participants. Participants included 8 CRF07_BC virus, 5 CRF08_BC
virus, 1 pure subtype C viruses 47 CRF01_AE, and 1 new CRF01_AE and B
recombinant virus 02CNRL42. The boostrap values are based on 500
replicates using the neighbor-joining method, with window: 200
basepairs, step 20 basepairs, Gapstrip:on, Kimura(2 parameter), T/t:2.0.
</div></figcaption>
</figure>
:::

## DISCUSSION

In this report, we have characterized the epidemiologic and genetic
features of HIV-1 infection in relatively low prevalence Liaoning
province. We believe this is the first time that comparative studies
have been conducted between HIV-1 in high and low prevalence provinces
in China. We have shown that in recent years, although HIV-1 prevalence
in Liaoning has remained low, the rate of new infection has increased
rapidly. The most astonishing finding is a dramatic increase in HIV-1
infection among MSM, accounting for more than 26% of the entire infected
populations in 2007. In addition, the component of infections through
heterosexual contact has reached 28%. In other words, sexual contact has
become the dominant mode of HIV-1 transmission (26% + 28% = 54%) among
infected cases.

Furthermore, major subtypes and CRFs of HIV-1 previously identified in
Henan, Guangxi, and Yunnan have all been identified in Liaoning.
Although there are some reports trying to illustrate the temporal and
spatial relationship between HIV-1 in high and low prevalence provinces
and regions, ^17,18^ it is impossible to describe exactly the chain of
transmission events that led to the current epidemiologic picture in
Liaoning. Nevertheless, our results provide some evidence that the
HIV-1/AIDS epidemic in Liaoning is the result of multiple introductions
of various HIV-1 strains from high prevalence provinces and regions.
Liaoning, therefore, serves as the most critical base for the
introduction and subsequent spread of HIV-1 in northeastern China.

As in high prevalence regions, there are close relationships between
HIV-1 subtypes/CRFs and certain risk behaviors in Liaoning. For example,
subtype B\' and B sequences are predominantly found in paid blood
donors, CRF07_BC and CRF08_BC mainly in IDU, and CRF01_AE in MSM,
indicating that these viruses were introduced to Liaoning through their
respective risk behaviors. However, such correlation has been
compromised to a large extent in Liaoning compared with that in the
original high prevalence provinces. Notably, multiple subtypes and CRFs
have been identified within the heterosexual risk group, suggesting that
HIV-1 strains from historically high-risk groups have been transmitted
to the general population via heterosexual contact. Furthermore, the
dramatic expansion of HIV-1 infection among MSM is comprised largely of
CRF01_AE sequences. The strong genetic relatedness among CRF01_AE
viruses demonstrates the rapid and perhaps recent dissemination of
viruses within the MSM group in Liaoning. ^19^ This hypothesis is
consistent with epidemiologic data showing 2006 as the turning point
when there was a significant increase in HIV-1 prevalence among MSM.
Lastly, as multiple subtypes and CRFs are circulating within the same
population in geographic proximity, it is expected that further
recombination events are likely to occur and generate novel
recombinants. Indeed, in this instance, we have identified a new
recombinant between CRF01_AE and B\', although this must be further
verified.

In summary, we have for the first time conducted province-wide
epidemiologic and genetic studies on HIV-1 in low prevalence Liaoning
province. Our data strongly indicate the close relationship between
HIV-1 sequences in Liaoning and those in high prevalence regions. HIV-1
has therefore been able to overcome our preventive measures and
continues to spread from the high prevalence southwest to the low
prevalence northeast region of China. As the epidemic continues to
spread, it is expected that viral genetic diversity will increase, which
will inevitably pose more challenges to vaccine, drug, and microbicide
development. It is high time to implement more effective and integrated
measures to reduce the further dissemination of these viruses-in low
prevalence areas like Liaoning and throughout the world\'s most populous
nation.
:::

::: section
## REFERENCES

<div>

1\. Wu Z, Liu Z, Detels R. HIV-1 infection in commercial plasma donors
in China. *Lancet* . 1995;346:61-62.

<div>

-   Cited Here \|
-   View Full Text \| PubMed \| CrossRef

</div>

</div>

<div>

2\. Wu Z, Sun X, Sullivan SG, et al. Public health. HIV testing in
China. *Science* . 2006;312:1475-1476.

<div>

-   Cited Here \|
-   View Full Text \| PubMed \| CrossRef

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

3\. Lu L, Jia M, Ma Y, et al. The Changing face of HIV in China.
*Nature* . 2008;455:607-609.

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

4\. State Council AIDS Working Committee Office, UN Theme Group on AIDS
in China. . 2007. Available at: . Accessed November 30, 2009.

</div>

<div>

5\. Graf M, Shao Y, Zhao Q, et al. Cloning and characterization of a
virtually full-length HIV type 1 genome from a subtype B\'-Thai strain
representing the most prevalent B-clade isolate in China. .
1998;14:285-288.

</div>

<div>

6\. Piyasirisilp S, McCutchan FE, Carr JK, et al. A recent outbreak of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in southern China was
initiated by two highly homogeneous, geographically separated strains,
circulating recombinant form AE and a novel BC recombinant. .
2000;74:11286-11295.

</div>

<div>

7\. Su L, Graf M, Zhang Y, et al. Characterization of a virtually
full-length human immunodeficiency virus type 1 genome of a prevalent
intersubtype (C/B\') recombinant strain in China. . 2000;74:11367-11376.

</div>

<div>

8\. Yu XF, Chen J, Shao Y, et al. Two subtypes of HIV-1 among
injection-drug users in southern China. . 1998;351:1250.

</div>

<div>

9\. Yu XF, Liu W, Chen J, et al. Rapid dissemination of a novel B/C
recombinant HIV-1 among injection drug users in southern China. .
2001;15:523-525.

</div>

<div>

10\. Zhang L, Chen Z, Cao Y, et al. Molecular characterization of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 and hepatitis C virus in paid blood donors
and injection drug users in china. . 2004;78:13591-13599.

</div>

<div>

11\. Zhang Y, Lu L, Ba L, et al. Dominance of HIV-1 subtype CRF01_AE in
sexually acquired cases leads to a new epidemic in Yunnan province of
China. . 2006;3:e443.

</div>

<div>

12\. Lai S, Liu W, Chen J, et al. Changes in HIV-1 incidence in heroin
users in Guangxi Province, China. . 2001;26:365-370.

</div>

<div>

13\. Luo C, Tian C, Hu D. HIV-1 subtype C in China. .
1995;345:1051-1052.

</div>

<div>

14\. Yang R, Kusagawa S, Zhang C, et al. Identification and
characterization of a new class of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
recombinants comprised of two circulating recombinant forms, CRF07_BC
and CRF08_BC, in China. . 2003;77:685-695.

</div>

<div>

15\. Yang R, Xia X, Kusagawa S, et al. On-going generation of multiple
forms of HIV-1 intersubtype recombinants in the Yunnan Province of
China. . 2002;16:1401-1407.

</div>

<div>

16\. Yu XF, Chen J, Shao Y, et al. Emerging HIV infections with distinct
subtypes of HIV-1 infection among injection drug users from
geographically separate locations in Guangxi Province, China. .
1999;22:180-188.

</div>

<div>

17\. Tee KK, Pybus OG, Li XJ, et al. Temporal and spatial dynamics of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 circulating recombinant forms 08_BC
and 07_BC in Asia. . 2008;82:9206-9015.

</div>

<div>

18\. Deng X, Liu H, Shao Y, Rayner S, et al. The epidemic origin and
molecular properties of B\': a founder strain of the HIV-1 transmission
in Asia. . 2008;22:1851-1858.

</div>

<div>

19\. Maljkovic Berry I, Ribeiro R, Kothari M, et al. Unequal
evolutionary rates in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
pandemic: the evolutionary rate of HIV-1 slows down when the epidemic
rate increases. . 2007;81:10625-10635.

</div>

<div>

View full references list

</div>
:::

<div>

**Keywords:**

HIV type I; injecting drug users; men who have sex with men; China

</div>

::: section
© 2010 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.
:::

</div>

View full article text

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

## Related Articles

</div>

::: section
-   <div>

    ### Effectiveness and Safety of Dolutegravir Versus Efavirenz-Based Antiviral Regimen in People Living With HIV-1 in Sichuan Province of China: A Real-World Study

    </div>

-   <div>

    ### Neprilysin in the Cerebrospinal Fluid and Serum of Patients Infected With HIV1-Subtypes C and B

    </div>

-   <div>

    ### Phylogenetic Analysis of HIV-1 CRF65_CPX Reveals Yunnan Province Is Still a Source Contributing to the Spread of HIV-1 in China

    </div>

-   <div>

    ### Dual Infection Contributes to Rapid Disease Progression in Men Who Have Sex With Men in China

    </div>

-   <div>

    ### Performance of the Bio-Rad Geenius HIV1/2 Supplemental Assay in Detecting "Recent" HIV Infection and Calculating Population Incidence

    </div>

-   <div>

    ### Neurosyphilis During Acute HIV Infection: A CNS Immunologic and Virologic Characterization

    </div>
:::

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

::: section
<div>

## Most Popular

</div>

<div>

-   <div>

    ## The ADAPT-ITT Model: A Novel Method of Adapting Evidence-Based HIV Interventions

    <div>

    <div>

    </div>

    </div>

    </div>

-   <div>

    ## The Effect of HIV Programs in South Africa on National HIV Incidence Trends, 2000--2019

    <div>

    <div>

    </div>

    </div>

    </div>

-   <div>

    ## New HIV Infections Among Key Populations and Their Partners in 2010 and 2022, by World Region: A Multisources Estimation

    <div>

    <div>

    </div>

    </div>

    </div>

-   <div>

    ## Updated Data and Methods for the 2023 UNAIDS HIV Estimates

    <div>

    <div>

    </div>

    </div>

    </div>

-   <div>

    ## The Continuum of HIV Care in Rural Communities in the United States and Canada: What Is Known and Future Research Directions

    <div>

    <div>

    </div>

    </div>

    </div>

</div>
:::

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Back to Top

<div>

<div>

::: section
<div>

</div>

<div>

#### Never Miss an Issue

<div>

Get new journal Tables of Contents sent right to your email inbox

Get New Issue Alerts

</div>

</div>
:::

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

#### Browse Journal Content

-   Most Popular
-   For Authors
-   About the Journal
-   Past Issues
-   Current Issue
-   Register on the website
-   Subscribe
-    Get eTOC Alerts

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

#### For Journal Authors

-   Submit an article
-   How to publish with us

</div>

<div>

#### Customer Service

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

-   
-   Activate Journal Subscription
-   Browse the help center
-   
-    Contact us at:
    -   <div>

        Support:

        </div>

        Submit a Service Request

    -   <div>

        </div>

        <div>

        <div>

        800-638-3030 (within USA)

        </div>

        <div>

        301-223-2300 (international)

        </div>

        </div>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Manage Cookie Preferences

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

-   

</div>

<div>

-   Privacy Policy
-   Legal Disclaimer
-   Terms of Use
-   Open Access Policy
-    Feedback
-    Sitemap
-    RSS Feeds
-    LWW Journals
-   Your California Privacy Choices

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-    Copyright © 2024
-   Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. and/or its subsidiaries. All rights
    reserved.

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>
