**Fig. 1 not found**

## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , inset). On the other hand, the proportion of cases transmitted through blood donation and transfusion decreased from 34% to 8% during the same period. Other risk factors such as injection drug use (IDU), mother to child transmission, and heterosexual contact have contributed relatively stable proportions to the total. Of note, individuals with unknown risk factors have contributed a substantial proportion of the total throughout the years ( Fig. 2 , inset).


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , inset). On the other hand, the proportion of cases transmitted through blood donation and transfusion decreased from 34% to 8% during the same period. Other risk factors such as injection drug use (IDU), mother to child transmission, and heterosexual contact have contributed relatively stable proportions to the total. Of note, individuals with unknown risk factors have contributed a substantial proportion of the total throughout the years ( Fig. 2 , inset).


**Fig. 3 not found**

## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 , sequences identified in Liaoning have a close genetic relationship with those previously found in Henan, Guangxi, and Yunnan provinces. For instance, sequences in the AE group are interdigitized with those identified in Guangxi (01 AE.CN.97.GX2F) and in neighboring Thailand (01 AE.TH.90.CM240). Although those found in heterosexual contact (closed triangle) are spread along many branches, most MSM (open triangle) sequences stem from a single branch, suggesting a close relationship among MSM in Liaoning ( Fig. 4 ). This group contains sequences from both MSM and heterosexual risk individuals. The genetic distance within this group is as low as 0.027, suggesting the MSM and heterosexual contact groups are tightly linked. This finding perhaps relates to the fact that most of the MSM in China are bisexual and married with family. FIGURE 4: Neighbor-joining trees showing the 3 major circulating HIV-1 subtypes and CRF in Liaoning and their genetic relationship with those identified in high prevalence provinces. Individual sequences are indicated by symbols corresponding to their known risk factor: homosexual (open triangle), heterosexual (closed triangle), IDU (closed square), and FBD (closed circle). For clarity only a few representative sequences from each risk groups are shown, together with reference sequences from different HIV-1 subtypes ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/content/index ). The bootstrap values of 1000 replicates are labeled on the major branches.


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 , sequences identified in Liaoning have a close genetic relationship with those previously found in Henan, Guangxi, and Yunnan provinces. For instance, sequences in the AE group are interdigitized with those identified in Guangxi (01 AE.CN.97.GX2F) and in neighboring Thailand (01 AE.TH.90.CM240). Although those found in heterosexual contact (closed triangle) are spread along many branches, most MSM (open triangle) sequences stem from a single branch, suggesting a close relationship among MSM in Liaoning ( Fig. 4 ). This group contains sequences from both MSM and heterosexual risk individuals. The genetic distance within this group is as low as 0.027, suggesting the MSM and heterosexual contact groups are tightly linked. This finding perhaps relates to the fact that most of the MSM in China are bisexual and married with family. FIGURE 4: Neighbor-joining trees showing the 3 major circulating HIV-1 subtypes and CRF in Liaoning and their genetic relationship with those identified in high prevalence provinces. Individual sequences are indicated by symbols corresponding to their known risk factor: homosexual (open triangle), heterosexual (closed triangle), IDU (closed square), and FBD (closed circle). For clarity only a few representative sequences from each risk groups are shown, together with reference sequences from different HIV-1 subtypes ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/content/index ). The bootstrap values of 1000 replicates are labeled on the major branches.


**Fig. 5 not found**

## Figure 1

FIGURE 1: Map of the People's Republic of China (A) and Liaoning province (B), and the geographic distribution of studied HIV-1-infected cases in Liaoning.


## Figure 2

FIGURE 2: Accumulative reported HIV-1-infected cases in Liaoning between 1991 and 2007.


## Figure 3

FIGURE 3: Correlation between risk factors and HIV-1 subtypes and CRF. A, Percentage of viral subtypes and CRF in each of risk group studied; and B, Percentage of risk groups in each of the viral subtype and CRF.


## Figure 4

FIGURE 4: Neighbor-joining trees showing the 3 major circulating HIV-1 subtypes and CRF in Liaoning and their genetic relationship with those identified in high prevalence provinces. Individual sequences are indicated by symbols corresponding to their known risk factor: homosexual (open triangle), heterosexual (closed triangle), IDU (closed square), and FBD (closed circle). For clarity only a few representative sequences from each risk groups are shown, together with reference sequences from different HIV-1 subtypes ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov/content/index ). The bootstrap values of 1000 replicates are labeled on the major branches.


## Figure 5

FIGURE 5: Bootscanning Analysis of HIV-1 gag-reverse transcriptase Sequences of 62 study participants. Participants included 8 CRF07_BC virus, 5 CRF08_BC virus, 1 pure subtype C viruses 47 CRF01_AE, and 1 new CRF01_AE and B recombinant virus 02CNRL42. The boostrap values are based on 500 replicates using the neighbor-joining method, with window: 200 basepairs, step 20 basepairs, Gapstrip:on, Kimura(2 parameter), T/t:2.0.


