# Phenotypic Susceptibility to Bevirimat in Isolates from HIV-1-Infected Patients without Prior Exposure to Bevirimat

## Abstract

Bevirimat (BVM) is the first of a new class of anti-HIV drugs with a novel mode of action known as maturation inhibitors. BVM inhibits the last cleavage of the Gag polyprotein by HIV-1 protease, leading to the accumulation of the p25 capsid-small peptide 1 (SP1) intermediate and resulting in noninfectious HIV-1 virions. Early clinical studies of BVM showed that over 50% of the patients treated with BVM did not respond to treatment. We investigated the impact of prior antiretroviral (ARV) treatment and/or natural genetic diversity on BVM susceptibility by conducting in vitro phenotypic analyses of viruses made from patient samples. We generated 31 recombinant viruses containing the entire *gag* and protease genes from 31 plasma samples from HIV-1-infected patients with ( n = 21) or without ( n = 10) prior ARV experience. We found that 58% of the patient isolates tested had a >10-fold reduced susceptibility to BVM, regardless of the patient\'s ARV experience or the level of isolate resistance to protease inhibitors. Analysis of mutants with site-directed mutations confirmed the role of the V370A SP1 polymorphism (SP1-V7A) in resistance to BVM. Furthermore, we demonstrated for the first time that a capsid polymorphism, V362I (CA protein-V230I), is also a major mutation conferring resistance to BVM. In contrast, none of the previously defined resistance-conferring mutations in Gag selected *in vitro* (H358Y, L363M, L363F, A364V, A366V, or A366T) were found to occur among the viruses that we analyzed. Our results should be helpful in the design of diagnostics for prediction of the potential benefit of BVM treatment in HIV-1-infected patients.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Reagents.

The viral plasmid that was used for cloning, pXXLAI, was a gift from
John Mellors. That plasmid was derived from the infectious clone
pLAI3.2, which was modified to contain an XmaI and an XbaI cloning site
within the HIV reverse transcriptase (RT) gene ( 14 ). The XmaI
restriction site downstream of HIV protease and the naturally occurring
SfoI restriction site upstream of HIV *gag* were used for cloning. The
293T cells used for virus production were purchased from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA). The MT-2 cells used in the
phenotypic assays were obtained from the NIH AIDS Research and Reference
Reagent Program (Germantown, MD). BVM was obtained from Acme
Biosciences, Inc. (Palo Alto, CA). Tenofovir (TFV), atazanavir (ATV),
and lopinavir (LPV) were synthesized at Gilead Sciences. The
mitochondrial dye used in the phenotypic assays,
2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-\[(phenylamino)carbonyl\]-2
*H* -tetrazolium hydroxide (XTT), was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, MO).

### Patient isolates.

Thirty-one plasma samples from ARV treatment-experienced or -naïve
patients were used to generate the virus isolates. None of the subjects
chosen had been exposed to BVM. Ten samples from ARV-naïve patients from
study GS-01-934 (collected between August 2003 and September 2003)
without any resistance mutations in protease or RT were randomly
selected. Twenty-one samples from ARV-experienced patients were selected
from two different past Gilead studies in order to capture a snapshot of
patient susceptibility to bevirimat at two different time periods.
Eleven of these samples were from ARV-experienced patients enrolled in
study GS-99-907 (collected between February 2000 and July 2000), and the
remaining 10 samples were from ARV-experienced patients enrolled in
study GS-US-183-0105 (collected between March 2006 and May 2006). The
samples from ARV-experienced patients were selected on the basis of the
presence of PI resistance-conferring mutations.

### Nucleic acid preparation and PCR.

A viral RNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) was used to obtain
HIV-1 RNA from the patient isolates. cDNA was generated with a
Ready-To-Go You-Prime First-Strand cDNA kit (GE Healthcare,
Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom) with the downstream oligonucleotide
RT-21 (5′-CTGTATTTCTGCTATTAAGTCTTTTGATGGG). The cDNA was amplified by
two rounds of PCR with Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase (New England
Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). The initial round of PCR (30 cycles) was done
with oligonucleotides U563 (5′-GCTTAAGCCTCAATAAAGCTTGCCTTG) and RT155
(5′-GGCCCAATTTTTGAAATTTTCCCTTCC), and the nested 2nd round of PCR (30
cycles) was done with oligonucleotides U613
(5′-GTGACTCTGGTAACTAGAGATCCCTC) and RC-5′-HIV-Xma
(5′-CTTTTGGGCCATCCATCCCGGGCTTTAATTTTACTGG). The 2nd round of PCR
resulted in the addition of an XmaI restriction site at the 3′ end of
the PCR product for further cloning. The approximately 1.8-kb PCR end
product containing the entire HIV *gag* and *protease* genes from the
clinical samples was purified by agarose gel electrophoresis (Qiagen).

### Plasmids constructs.

The gel-purified PCR products were subcloned with a Zero Blunt TOPO PCR
cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). After overnight growth, colonies
from the kanamycin plates were pooled in order to maintain the diversity
of the HIV quasispecies present in the patient isolates and were grown
overnight in 3 ml of LB broth containing kanamycin. Plasmid DNA was
extracted with a GenElute HP miniprep kit (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested
overnight first with XmaI and then with SfoI (New England Biolabs). The
band of interest was gel purified prior to and after digestion with
SfoI. Viral plasmid pXXLAI was doubly digested overnight with both XmaI
and SfoI and gel purified. The SfoI-XmaI patient-derived HIV DNA
fragment (100 ng) was ligated into the pXXLAI doubly digested vector
(140 ng) overnight at 16°C with T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs).
XL-10 Gold ultracompetent cells (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa
Clara, CA) were transformed with the ligation mixture and were grown
overnight in 150 ml LB broth containing ampicillin. After plasmid DNA
extraction and purification (Qiagen), the polyclonal plasmid DNA was
sequenced (Elim Biopharmaceuticals, Hayward, CA) and used for virus
production.

### Mutant viruses constructed by site-directed mutagenesis.

DNA fragments containing the mutations of interest were generated in two
rounds of PCR. The mutagenesis primers were designed either to change
the *gag-* SP1 gene of specific samples into the wild-type LAI sequence
(isolates 1, 3, and 6; see below) or to insert or revert to the
wild-type sequence the V362I Gag-capsid mutation (isolates 7, 8, and 12
and LAI laboratory strain; see below) while keeping the remaining
sequence intact. The mutagenesis primers were used in the 1st round of
PCR, along with the appropriate oligonucleotides (listed above), to
generate two DNA fragments containing the mutated sequence either at the
3′ end or at the 5′ end. These fragments were gel purified and used as
the template for the 2nd round of PCR by using the same oligonucleotides
described above. Viral plasmid DNA (pXXLAI backbone) was generated from
the 2nd-round PCR product as described above, except that it was
obtained from an individual clone. Mutant plasmids were sequenced as
described above.

### DNA transfection.

The transfection reagent TransIT-LT1 (Mirus Bio Corporation, Madison,
WI) was used to transfect 7 μg of the viral plasmid DNA (polyclonal or
clonal) in 2 million 293T cells seeded in T-25 cell culture flasks in a
6-ml volume 1 day before transfection. The cell culture supernatant
containing the virus stock was harvested 2 days after transfection and
was monitored by p24 and infectivity assays.

### Phenotypic assays.

The susceptibilities of the mutant viruses to bevirimat, tenofovir, lopinavir, and atazanavir were measured in a 5-day cell-killing assay with MT-2 cells and by use of the XTT assay, as described previously ( 11 , 18 ). In short, infection of 2.4 million MT-2 cells with either mutant or wild-type HIV-1 LAI was carried out in 1-ml tubes at 37°C with gentle rocking. The amount of virus used for the infections was determined by titration of each viral construct's infectivity and was set as the amount of virus that gave a signal-to-noise ratio in the range of 2.5 to 4.0 in the XTT assay. That amount corresponds to a multiplicity of infection of approximately 0.001 when commercially available HIV-1 strain IIIb (Applied Biotechnologies, Inc., Columbia, MD) is used. The cells were plated in 96-well plates containing compound dilutions or no-drug controls with ≈17,000 cells/well in a 200-μl volume. After a 5-day incubation at 37°C in 5% CO ~2~ , 100 μl of medium from each well was removed and replaced with 100 μl of 1.67 mg/ml XTT. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 1 h, and the absorbance (450 nm minus 650 nm) was measured with a Vmax microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) to measure the cytopathic effect generated by the viral infection.

### Data analysis.

For the phenotypic assays, percent cell death in the drug-containing
wells in comparison to that in the uninfected cell control was
calculated by using the Excel program (Microsoft, Redmond, WA), and the
data were plotted by using the SigmaPlot program (SPSS, Chicago, IL).
The effective concentration required to inhibit viral replication by 50%
(EC ~50~ ) was also determined by using the SigmaPlot program.
Sequencing data were analyzed by use of the SeqMan and MegAlign programs
(DNAStar, Madison, WI).

### Nucleotide sequence accession number.

The sequences described here have been submitted to GenBank under
reference numbers HM116810 to HM116840 .



## RESULTS

### Phenotypic susceptibility of patient isolates.

Recombinant pLAI viruses containing the entire *gag-protease* region of
HIV-1 from 21 ARV-experienced patients without prior BVM exposure and
from 10 ARV-naïve patients were analyzed phenotypically. Phenotypic
susceptibility to BVM, as well as to two protease inhibitors (lopinavir
and atazanavir) and TFV, was determined by the XTT assay in MT-2 cells.
These analyses revealed that over half of the patient isolates tested
(18/31; 58%) (Table ​ (Table1) 1 ) showed a highly significant \>10-fold
reduced susceptibility to BVM compared to that of wild-type HIV-1 strain
LAI, and the majority of isolates with reduced susceptibility (16/18)
showed \>100-fold resistance to BVM. The remaining 13 isolates had BVM
susceptibilities ranging from 0.7- to 5.2-fold the susceptibility of the
wild-type control. Six of these 13 isolates showed significantly reduced
susceptibility to BVM compared to that of the wild type (range, 1.8- to
5.2-fold), likely reflecting the range of nearly wild-type
susceptibility to BVM in these complex patient isolates. Among the 18
isolates showing \>10-fold reduced susceptibility to BVM, 12 were from
ARV-experienced patients (12/21; 57%), while the remaining 6 isolates
were from ARV-naïve patients (6/10; 60%). Conversely, among the 13
isolates with BVM susceptibility within 10-fold of that of the wild
type, 9 isolates were from ARV-experienced patients (9/21; 43%) and 4
isolates were from ARV-naïve patients (4/10; 40%). These results are
depicted graphically in Fig. ​ Fig.2A 2A and demonstrate no association
between ARV treatment experience and BVM resistance ( *P* = 1.00,
Fisher\'s exact test).

FIG. 2.

Fold change in the BVM EC ~50~ for the 31 patient-derived isolates
compared to the EC ~50~ for the wild-type control stratified according
to antiretroviral therapy status (A) or the presence of protease
inhibitor resistance (PI-R) (B).


PI resistance was detected in 18 of the 31 isolates and was
characterized by the presence of at least three PI resistance-conferring
mutations (among the PI resistance-conferring mutations D30N, V32I,
L33F, M46I/L, I47V, G48V, I50V, I54V/M/L, L76V, V82A/F/L/T, I84V, and
L90M) and at least 4-fold reduced susceptibility to either LPV or ATV
(Table ​ (Table2). 2 ). Among the 18 isolates showing \>10-fold reduced
susceptibility to BVM, 11 isolates had PI resistance (11/18; 61%), while
the other 7 isolates did not (7/13; 54%); and among the 13 isolates with
BVM susceptibility within 10-fold of that of the wild type, 7 isolates
had PI resistance (7/18; 39%), while the other 6 isolates did not (6/13;
46%). These results (shown in Fig. ​ Fig.2B) 2B ) fail to demonstrate an
association between PI resistance and BVM resistance in these patient
isolates ( *P* = 0.73, Fisher\'s exact test). The susceptibility to TFV
was within 1.9-fold of that of the wild type (range, 0.3- to 1.9-fold;
data not shown), consistent with the fact that all 31 recombinant
viruses carried the wild-type RT sequence.


### Genotypic analysis of patient isolates.

The HIV-1 *gag* gene from the 31 patient-derived isolates was sequenced
entirely in order to study the relationship between the observed
susceptibility to BVM and the presence or the absence of the previously
defined polymorphisms in Gag-SP1 at amino acid positions 369, 370, and
371 that were associated with a reduced clinical response to BVM ( 7 ,
12 ), and other polymorphisms near the capsid-SP1 cleavage site or
elsewhere in the capsid protein. In all cases in which the V370A or
V370M polymorphism or a T371 deletion in Gag-SP1 was present, reduced
susceptibility to BVM was observed (reduced 11-fold to \>100-fold
compared with the susceptibility of the wild type). A Q369H polymorphism
was found in two isolates with nearly wild-type susceptibility and
therefore did not appear to play a role in resistance in our sample set.

Five patient isolates (isolates 12, 39, 2, 4, and 29) showing \>100-fold
reduced susceptibility to BVM compared with the susceptibility of the
wild type had no natural polymorphisms at position 369, 370, or 371 of
Gag-SP1, suggesting that natural genetic variations conferring
resistance to BVM exist beyond these three residues. Two of these
isolates (isolates 12 and 39) carried a V362I mutation in the capsid
protein that could be involved in natural resistance to BVM due to its
presence near the CA protein-SP1 cleavage site where BVM is thought to
bind. In addition, the V362I mutation was not found in any of the
isolates showing wild-type or nearly wild-type susceptibility to BVM.
Phenotypic analyses of mutant viruses with the V362I mutation
constructed by site-directed mutagenesis are described below. For the
remaining three isolates (isolates 2, 4, and 29), resistance to BVM
could be associated with the presence of polymorphisms at Gag-SP1
residue 372, 373, 374, or 375 and/or could possibly occur in conjunction
with other polymorphisms in the capsid protein (Table ​ (Table2). 2 ).
Common polymorphisms, such as I138L/M, A146P/S, I147L, V159I, V215L,
H219Q, I223V/A, G248A/T, N252S/A/H, T280V/A, R286K, S310T, E312D, A340G,
and G357S (each of which was found in at least six isolates), were
similarly partitioned between BVM-sensitive and BVM-resistant isolates
and are therefore unlikely to play a role in resistance to BVM. However,
other polymorphisms, such as K162R, Q182S, T186I, H219P, N252G, E260D,
R264K, and T303V, were found uniquely in these three resistant isolates
and may play a role in explaining the resistance to BVM.

### Phenotypic analysis of mutants with site-directed mutations (SDMs).

In order to gain insight into the suspected role of the SP1
polymorphisms as well as the hypothesized role of the V362I capsid
mutation in resistance to BVM, nine mutant viruses were constructed by
site-directed mutagenesis of patient isolates or wild-type laboratory
strain HIV-1 LAI. The SP1 polymorphisms from isolates 1 and 3 were
mutated back to the wild-type sequence; the SP1 polymorphisms from
isolate 6 were reverted back to the wild-type sequence in a stepwise
fashion, generating two additional intermediate viruses carrying either
the V370A mutation alone or both the S373A and A374T mutations; and the
V362I capsid mutation was added to isolates 7 and 8 and the LAI
laboratory strain and was mutated back to the wild-type sequence for
patient isolate 12 (Table ​ (Table3). 3 ). In all three cases of
reversion of the SP1 polymorphisms to the wild-type sequence, full
susceptibility to BVM was restored, going from \>100-fold BVM resistance
before mutagenesis down to 0.6-, 0.7-, and 0.4-fold of that for the wild
type for isolates SDM-1, SDM-3, and SDM-6a, respectively, after
mutagenesis (Table ​ (Table3). 3 ). Furthermore, the analysis of the
intermediate mutants showed that the V370A mutation in SP1 by itself is
entirely responsible for the strong reduction in susceptibility to BVM
observed for isolates SDM-6c and 6 (both of which had \>100-fold BVM
resistance), while the SP1 polymorphisms present in mutant SDM-6b and
isolate 6 (S373A and A374T) played no role in resistance to BVM on their
own. Additionally, these data indicate that none of the capsid
polymorphisms present in isolates 1, 3, and 6 play any role in
resistance to BVM. For isolate SDM-12, full susceptibility to BVM was
restored by reversion of the V362I mutation to the wild-type sequence,
suggesting that no other polymorphisms in this isolate alter
susceptibility to BVM. In agreement with this observation,
susceptibility to BVM was entirely lost in all three cases in which the
V362I capsid mutation was added to viruses that were previously fully
susceptible to BVM (mutants SDM-7, SDM-8, and SDM-LAI). Altogether,
these results clearly indicate that the observed reduced susceptibility
to BVM was strongly associated with the presence of polymorphisms in
SP1---most notably, V370A---as well as the presence of the previously
undescribed V362I capsid mutation.



## DISCUSSION

We conducted *in vitro* phenotypic analyses of 31 recombinant HIV-1
isolates containing the entire *gag* and *protease* genes extracted from
31 patient samples in an otherwise wild-type HIV-1 background (HIV-1
LAI). The patients in the study were either ARV naïve ( *n* = 10) or ARV
experienced ( *n* = 21) and included patients with extensive protease
inhibitor experience and PI resistance. In contrast to our original
hypothesis that prior ARV treatment and, in particular, protease
inhibitor resistance may have induced the selection of mutations in Gag
that could have impaired susceptibility or the response to BVM, we found
that in the 31 patient isolates that we analyzed, similar proportions of
viruses showed resistance to BVM, regardless of the patient\'s ARV
experience or the presence of PI resistance. Given the limited number of
samples that we have tested, our results cannot rule out the possibility
that PI resistance contributes to BVM resistance, as has been observed
by others ( 17 ). However, our results clearly show that resistance to
BVM is found independently of both PI resistance and treatment
experience and is observed in the presence of natural polymorphisms in
HIV-1. As a consequence of this genetic diversity, we found that nearly
60% (18/31; 58%) of the samples tested in this study showed innate
reduced susceptibility to BVM, consistent with the clinical trial
response data, which indicated that 52% of patients did not respond to
BVM treatment ( 7 , 12 ).

In the reported clinical trial, researchers had determined that a poor
response to BVM was associated with the presence of polymorphisms at
positions Q369, V370, and T371 in SP1 ( 7 , 12 ). In our study, we have
observed an association between reduced susceptibility to BVM and the
presence of polymorphisms at position V370. The important role of the
V370A polymorphism in the resistance to BVM was confirmed through the
phenotypic analysis of a recombinant mutant that was constructed by
site-directed mutagenesis and that contained the V370A polymorphism by
itself, which was able to confer \>100-fold resistance to BVM compared
with that of the wild type. These results are in agreement with data for
patient isolates and phenotypic data for mutants constructed by
site-directed mutagenesis published earlier ( 16 ). It is noteworthy
that the natural polymorphism V370I (SP1-V7I), which conferred reduced
susceptibility to BVM in association with a T371 deletion in our study
(isolate 10), was identified in several *in vitro* resistance selection
experiments performed with a low BVM concentration (85 nM, or 50 ng/ml);
in those experiments, it was thought to play a compensatory role in
replication ( 1 , 2 ). Interestingly, one of our isolates (isolate 32)
with a V370I-V370V mixture showed wild-type BVM susceptibility, while
another isolate (isolate 38) with a V370A-V370V mixture showed
\>100-fold decreased susceptibility to BVM, suggesting that these two
substitutions at V370 differentially affect BVM susceptibility.

The presence of the T371 deletion often coincided with the presence of a
polymorphism at V370, making the role of the T371 deletion in resistance
more difficult to assess. In our data set, one isolate (isolate 25) had
the T371 deletion alone and showed an 11-fold reduced susceptibility to
BVM. This is consistent with earlier data that showed that a mutant
constructed by site-directed mutagenesis with the T371 deletion alone
had a 52.2-fold reduced susceptibility to BVM, while a V370A mutant had
\>151.4-fold reduced susceptibility to BVM ( 16 ), suggesting that the
T371 deletion plays a less critical role than V370A in resistance to
BVM. Interestingly, the T371 deletion was found only in PI-resistant
isolates in our data set, suggesting the possibility that that deletion
was coselected by treatment with protease inhibitors. However, the T371
deletion was not reported among 82 PI-experienced patients in another
study ( 10 ). Of note, the T371Q polymorphism observed in isolate 36 was
associated with wild-type BVM susceptibility, and a T371I mutation
(SP1-T8I) was reported to arise in a selection experiment without use of
the drug ( 1 ).

In our data set, two isolates had a Q369H polymorphism, with both
viruses showing nearly wild-type susceptibility to BVM. Similarly,
mutant viruses constructed by site-directed mutagenesis with either
Q369A or Q369H alone have been reported by others to have nearly
wild-type BVM susceptibility ( 16 ), suggesting that these Q369
polymorphisms play no role in resistance to BVM when they are found
independently of the V370 or T371 polymorphism. Furthermore, we were
able to show that the S373A and A374T SP1 polymorphisms on their own had
no effect on resistance to BVM.

Two patient isolates (isolates 12 and 39) with no BVM
resistance-conferring polymorphisms in SP1 were found to have \>100-fold
reduced susceptibility to BVM. These isolates carried the V362I
polymorphism in the capsid protein (CA protein-V230I), which, we
suspected, could be involved in resistance to BVM because of its
location at the P2 position of the CA protein-SP1 cleavage site. We
constructed by site-directed mutagenesis mutant viruses in which we
either reverted the V362I mutation from isolate 12 to the wild-type
sequence or added the V362I mutation to isolates with wild-type BVM
susceptibility (isolates 7 and 8 and laboratory HIV strain LAI). These
analyses have shown that reversion of the isoleucine back to a valine at
position 362 in isolate 12 completely restored susceptibility to BVM,
while mutation of the valine to isoleucine at position 362 in the three
wild-type isolates led to the complete loss of BVM susceptibility. These
data clearly demonstrate that the previously undescribed V362I natural
polymorphism in the CA protein is a mutation that confers resistance to
BVM. Notably, this mutation was reported to arise in the background of a
mutant virus containing the L363M mutation during *in vitro* resistance
selection with a high BVM concentration and was thought to be a
secondary mutation that compensated for the replication defect ( 2 ).
The effect of the V362I mutation on the replication capacity of the
viruses was not formerly explored in this study; however, in our assays
viruses carrying that mutation did not show any replication defect. The
V362I mutation was found in 13% (4/31) of the patients in our study, and
other estimates of the prevalence of this mutation in the patient
population have been shown to vary from 7% to 18% ( 9 , 10 , 19 ). The
presence of the V362I mutation in patients could adversely affect
responses to BVM treatment.

Three patient isolates with \>100-fold reduced susceptibility to BVM
(isolates 2, 4, and 29) did not have the V362I mutation or any change at
position 369, 370, or 371. These viruses had a few polymorphisms in SP1
that could potentially be responsible for the resistance observed:
isolate 2 had the S373A, A374G, and T375A polymorphisms; isolate 4 had
the N372A, A374T, and T375N polymorphisms; and isolate 29 had the T375A
polymorphism. The presence of the T375A polymorphism by itself in
isolate 29 is unlikely to play a role in resistance to BVM, as it is
also found in an isolate with nearly wild-type susceptibility to BVM
(isolate 36). As a consequence, it is likely that the genotypic
determinants of resistance in this isolate reside outside of SP1 and the
polymorphism T303V in the capsid protein, which was uniquely found in
that isolate, may be involved in that role. While it is conceivable that
the combination of polymorphisms in SP1 may be responsible for the loss
of susceptibility to BVM in isolates 2 and 4, most of these SP1
polymorphisms---S373A, A374T, T375A, and T375N---were also found in
isolates or mutants constructed by site-directed mutagenesis with nearly
wild-type BVM susceptibility and are therefore unlikely to play a role
in resistance to BVM, leaving only A374G in isolate 2 and N372A in
isolate 4 with potential roles in resistance to BVM. However, as with
isolate 29, it may be that the genetic basis of resistance lies in the
capsid gene. The capsid polymorphisms H219P and R264K, unique to isolate
2, and the capsid polymorphisms K162R, Q182S, T186I, N252G, and E260D,
unique to isolate 4, may play a role in resistance to BVM. In addition,
protease inhibitor resistance-conferring mutations could also play a
role in BVM resistance in these isolates, as they carry mutations such
as L38W, P39Q, I50V, T74S, T80A, and N83H that are not found in isolates
that are sensitive to BVM. Further studies would be required to address
the potential role of these polymorphisms in resistance to BVM.

In conclusion, we have found that nearly 60% of the patient isolates in
our study had innate resistance to BVM of \>10-fold. Interestingly, none
of the *in vitro* -selected resistance-conferring mutations to BVM were
found to exist in the 31 patient isolates included in our study.
Instead, we showed that a previously undescribed polymorphism, V362I (CA
protein-V230I), is a major mutation conferring resistance to BVM, and we
confirmed that the V370A polymorphism (SP1-V7A) also plays a major role
in resistance to BVM. These genotypic and phenotypic data extend the
existing data set on BVM resistance and should help with the development
of diagnostics for predicting the response to BVM treatment in
HIV-1-infected patients.



