# High-Level Cross-Resistance to Didanosine Observed in South African Children Failing an Abacavir- or Stavudine-Based 1 ^st^ -Line Regimen

Kim Steegen , ^1\ ,^ ^2\ ,^ ^\*^ Leon Levin , ^3^ Irene Ketseoglou ,
^1\ ,^ ^2^ Michelle Bronze , ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Maria A. Papathanasopoulos , ^1^
Sergio Carmona , ^1\ ,^ ^2^ and Wendy Stevens ^1\ ,^ ^2^

Cheryl A. Stoddart, Editor

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer



## Abstract

### Background

The knowledge-base of emerging drug resistance profiles in children
exposed to abacavir-based antiretroviral regimens in South Africa is
very limited. This study investigated the suitability of
didanosine-based 2 ^nd^ -line regimens for children in the context of
antiretroviral drug resistance patterns emerging after 1 ^st^ -line
virologic failure.

### Methods

A retrospective dataset of 354 antiretroviral drug resistant genotypes
from children failing either abacavir (n = 81) or stavudine (n = 273)
based 1 ^st^ -line regimens, was analysed. Samples were sent to the HIV
genotyping laboratory at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic
Hospital, for routine testing. P *ol* sequences were submitted to the
Stanford HIV drug resistance database for genotypic predictions.

### Results

Children were exposed to abacavir or stavudine-based 1 ^st^ -line
regimens for an average of 21 and 36 months, respectively. The frequency
of reduced susceptibility to didanosine was substantial in the
abacavir-exposed group (69.1%).This reduced susceptibility was commonly
attributed to L74V/I (n = 44) and to a lesser extent K65R (n = 10)
mutations. Didanosine resistance was observed in 43.2% of patients
exposed to stavudine-based regimens. In contrast, most children remained
susceptible to stavudine regardless of exposure to abacavir (77.8%) or
stavudine (74.7%). At least 80% of children remained susceptible to
zidovudine irrespective of stavudine or abacavir-exposure. The presence
of the K65R mutation was more common after abacavir pressure (12.3% vs
1.8%).

### Conclusion

Analysis revealed that didanosine-based 2 ^nd^ -line regimens have
limitations for South African children, given the high frequency of
mutations that confer cross-resistance to didanosine; especially after
abacavir-exposure. This data has influenced South African paediatric
treatment guidelines, which now recommend zidovudine-based 2 ^nd^ -line
regimens.



## Introduction

By the end of 2011 an estimated 460 000 South African children were
infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 (HIV-1) \[1\] , of
which only 152 000 were on antiretroviral drug treatment (ART) \[2\] .
Since August 2012, the National Department of Health recommends ART
initiation in all children under 5 years of age, regardless of their
immunological or clinical status \[3\] .

The early initiation of treatment has reduced early mortality in the
paediatric population \[4\] , but has led to the inevitable increase in
the number of children failing ART and subsequent development of HIV-1
drug resistance. Since children face life-long treatment ahead of them,
it should be ensured that the available 1 ^st^ and 2 ^nd^ -line regimens
are maintained as long as possible. Recently, several studies addressed
the HIV-1 drug resistance profiles in South African children failing ART
\[5\] -- \[9\] . These studies noted very similar reverse transcriptase
(RT) resistance patterns as compared to adults, with M184V and K103N
being the most prevalent mutations \[5\] , \[6\] , \[9\] . Conversely,
various studies highlighted a much higher prevalence of protease
inhibitor (PI) resistance mutations compared to adults \[6\] -- \[9\] .
This difference in PI resistance might partly be explained by the
single-dose ritonavir exposure in a significant number of children. Yet,
none of these studies described the HIV-1 drug resistance profile of
abacavir (ABC) based regimens.

In 2010, the South African preferred 1 ^st^ -line paediatric regimen was
changed from a stavudine and lamivudine (d4T+3TC) based regimen to an
ABC and 3TC-based regimen, with a suggested switch to a didanosine and
zidovudine (ddI+AZT) based 2 ^nd^ -line regimen upon virological failure
\[10\] .

In view of the lack of evidence about the HIV-1 drug resistance profile
after ABC-exposure in a South African setting, and with the
understanding that mutations arising from the use of d4T and ABC can
confer cross-resistance to ddI, a retrospective study was conducted to
investigate the HIV-1 drug resistance profiles in children failing d4T
or ABC-based 1 ^st^ -line regimens and the subsequent implications for a
ddI-based 2 ^nd^ -line regimen.



## Materials and Methods

### Ethics statement

This study was conducted with Ethical clearance by the Research on Human
Subjects (Medical) Committee at the University of the Witwatersrand
(Clearance Number M120730). Due to the retrospective nature of this
study, no informed consent was obtained from the next of kin,
caretakers, or guardians on behalf of the children. This is in line with
the Research on Human Subjects (Medical) Committee policy which states
informed consent is not required for this type of study and a waiver was
hence granted.

### Patient samples

At the time of data collection, the National Health Laboratory Service
(NHLS) offered HIV drug resistance testing at two laboratories in South
Africa (Johannesburg and Stellenbosh). The HIV Genotyping Laboratory at
Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital accepts and processes
samples for HIV drug resistance testing from any government health
facility in the country, but most samples are collected from Gauteng,
North West and KwaZulu-Natal provinces. Due to the lack of specific
HIV-1 drug resistance testing guidelines, at the time of study, the
patients referred for resistance testing are identified at the
clinicians\' discretion. However, all patients need to have proof of
virological failure, which is defined as at least one HIV viral load
\>1000 copies/ml. All sequences obtained from The HIV Genotyping
Laboratory at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital are stored
in a database (TherapyEdge, Advanced Biological Laboratories, South
Africa).

For this analysis, only sequences obtained at the HIV Genotyping
Laboratory at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital from
children ≤15 years old with known treatment history, who were exposed to
a d4T+3TC (n = 279) or ABC+3TC-based regimen (n = 91) at the time of HIV
drug resistance testing were included in this study. Children who had
prior exposure to any other ART regimen were not excluded from analysis.
The data retrieval was limited to sequences obtained from samples
collected between 2009 and 2012. Demographic and clinical information
such as age, ART regimen, time on ART, and the latest viral load
measurements, was collected from laboratory request forms or the
electronic laboratory information system. Phylogenetic analysis (Mega5
\[11\] ) and demographic information was used to ensure that only one
sample per patient was included in the analysis.

### Pol genotyping

The protease (PR) and reverse transcriptase (RT) nucleotide sequences
were obtained using the ViroSeq HIV-1 Genotyping Assay (Abbott
Molecular, Illinois, USA) or the in-house genotyping protocol \[12\] --
\[14\] . Both assays have a lower limit of detection of 1000 copies/ml.
The in-house protocol was extensively validated against the ViroSeq
HIV-1 Genotyping Assay and results were proven to be equivalent.

### Resistance mutation analysis

The retrieved sequences were resubmitted to the ViroScore database
(TherapyEdge, Advanced Biological Laboratories, South Africa) for
updated analysis with the Stanford HIV-1 database v6.2.0. The
identification of the HIV-1 drug resistance mutations was based on the
most recent International AIDS Society mutation list \[15\] . Predicted
antiretroviral drug resistance profiles were categorized as either being
susceptible (including potential low-level resistance), intermediate
(including low-level resistance) or high-level resistant. All samples
were subtyped using the REGA subtyping tool v2.0 \[16\] .

### Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6. Differences
between groups for non-parametric data such as age, viral load and time
on treatment were calculated using the 2-sided Wilcoxon Mann-Witney
test. Two-sided Fisher\'s exact tests were performed to assess
proportional differences between groups for gender and mutation
prevalence. A p-value of \<0.05 was considered statistically
significant. Due to the retrospective nature of this analysis, some
clinical and demographical data was not available for analysis. The
health care facility was not contacted to obtain these missing clinical
or demographic data. Since the missing data was completely random, the
dataset was analysed as such, without taking missing data into account.

### Sequence data

The *pol* nucleotide sequences were submitted to GenBank using Sequin
v9.50 ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Sequin ) and are available under accession
numbers KJ176285 to KJ176654 .



## Results

Three-hundred and seventy (n = 370) appropriate HIV-1 drug resistance
results were retrieved from the database. Patient demographics and
clinical data are summarized in Table 1 . Male children (55.1%) were
slightly better represented in the dataset compared to female
counterparts. The majority of children (88.6%) were between 3 and 15
years old. The average age of children, known to be (n = 93) or have
been (n = 16) exposed to PI-containing regimens was significantly
younger compared to those children without exposure to PIs (5 versus 10
years respectively, p\<0.0001). This finding confirms adherence to the
treatment guidelines, which recommend children younger than 3 years of
age to be initiated on a PI-based regimen. The median viral load of all
children included in this analysis was 4.6 log RNA copies/ml after a
median treatment duration of 28 months ( Table 1 ).

### Table 1

**Demographics and clinical characteristics of 370 South African
children failing a 1 ^st^ -line antiretroviral drug regimen.**

Patient demographics

All patients (n = 370)

ABC-group (n = 91)

d4T-group (n = 279)

N (%)

Mean

IQR

N (%)

Mean

IQR

N (%)

Mean

IQR

p-value

**Gender**

*F*

161 (43.5)

43 (47.3)

118 (42.3)

0.1440

*M*

204 (55.1)

46 (50.5)

158 (56.6)

*unknown*

5 (1.4)

2 (2.2)

3 (1.1)

**Age** *(years)*

366 (98.9)

8

5--12

90 (98.9)

8

3--12

276 (98.9)

9

5--12

0.4235

**Viral Load** *(log RNA copies/ml)*

341 (92.2)

4.6

4.0--5.1

86 (94.5)

4.7

4.2--5.4

255 (91.4)

4.5

3.9--5.0

0.0291

**Time on ART regimen** *(months)*

Time on current regimen

282 (76.2)

31

18--47

65 (71.4)

18

12--30

217 (77.8)

34

22--50

\<0.0001

Time on previous regimen

55 (14.9)

24

16--36

38 (46.9)

24

21--35

17 (6.1)

18

11--38

0.1227

Total time on ART

282 (76.2)

35

21--50

65 (71.4)

25

14--45

217 (77.8)

35

24--52

0.0115

**HIV drug resistance detected**

354 (95.7)

81 (89.0)

273 (97.8)

0.0011

Open in a separate window

Details about the antiretroviral drug treatment history of all children
are depicted in Table 2 . Most children (n = 279, 75.4%) were failing a
d4T-containing regimen, after median time of exposure to that regimen of
34 months (IQR: 21--50 months). Seventeen (6.1%) of these children had
prior ART exposure for a median time of 18 months. An additional 91
children (24.6%) were failing ABC-based regimens at the time of HIV drug
resistance testing after a median of 18 months (IQR 12--24 months)
exposure to the current regimen. However, 38 children in the ABC-group
had documented prior ART exposure (median 24 months, IQR 19--36 months).
This prior ART exposure included d4T for 34 (41.9%) children as their
treatment was most likely changed when the new treatment guidelines were
released in 2010. The effect of prior exposure to d4T in the ABC-group
was assessed by comparing the prevalence of each mutation between the
children who had only been exposed to ABC-based regimens (n = 47),
versus those who were currently failing and ABC-based regimen, but had
prior exposure to d4T (n = 34). The proportion of these mutations did
not significantly differ between the two groups (data not shown),
therefore all 81 children failing an ABC-base regimen at the time of HIV
drug resistance testing were analysed as one group. Analysis of the
antiretroviral drug resistance profiles showed that 354 children
harboured virus with known drug resistance mutations. Fully susceptible
drug resistance profiles were only observed in 4.3% (n = 16) of the
examined population. This observation was significantly more common in
the ABC-exposed group (n = 10, 11.0%) versus the d4T group (n = 6, 2.1%,
p = 0.0011). These 16 "wild-type" genotypes were excluded from
subsequent analysis. Subtyping revealed that most children were infected
with HIV-1 subtype C. One child was infected with a subtype B virus and
two others were infected with an A/C recombinant virus.

### Table 2

**Antiretroviral Treatment history of 370 children failing a 1 ^st^
-line antiretroviral drug regimen.**

ART at time of virological failure

Number of patients N (%)

Previous ART regimen ^a^

Number of patients N

**ABC-based**

**91 (24.6)**

ABC+3TC+EFV

57 (15.4)

**d4T** +3TC+EFV

21

**d4T** +3TC+ **NVP**

1

**d4T** +3TC+ **LPV/r**

1

**d4T** +3TC+ABC+ **LPV/r**

1

**d4T**

1

AZT+3TC+ **LPV/r**

1

ABC+3TC+ **TDF**

1

none

30

ABC+3TC+LPV/r

34 (9.2)

**d4T** +3TC+LPV/r

5

**d4T** +3TC+ **EFV**

3 ^b^

**d4T** +AZT+3TC+LPV/r

1

ABC+3TC+ **EFV**

1

**NVP**

1

none

23

**d4T-based**

**279 (75.4)**

d4T+3TC+EFV

190 (51.4)

d4T+3TC+ **LPV/r**

12

d4T+3TC+ **NVP**

1

**AZT** +3TC+ **NVP**

1

none

176

d4T+3TC+LPV/r

70 (18.9)

d4T+3TC+ **EFV**

2

none

68

d4T+3TC+NVP

14 (3.8)

d4T+3TC+ **LPV/r**

1

none

13

d4T+3TC+TDF

4 (1.1)

none

4

d4T+3TC+SQV/r

1 (0.3)

none

1

Open in a separate window

^a^ Abbreviations: ABC: abacavir, TDF: tenofovir, ddI: didanosine, d4T:
stavudine, 3TC: lamivudine, AZT: zidovudine, NVP: nevirapine, EFV:
efavirenz, LPV/r: boosted lopinavir, SQV/r: boosted saquinavir.

^b^ One patient had prior exposure to AZT+ddI+LPV/r.

A detailed analysis of mutations associated with NNRTI resistance
stratified according to a NNRTI or non-NNRTI-containing regimen, is
depicted in Figure 1 and ​ and2. 2 . A total of 265 children (74.9%) had
been exposed to EFV or NVP, including 8 children who received a
LPV/r-based regimen at time of resistance testing. The most common NNRTI
mutation in this group was K103N (n = 152, 57.4%) followed by V106M
(n = 105, 39.6%), P225H (n = 42, 15.8%) and V179D (n = 29, 10.9%, Figure
1 ). The Y181C mutation appeared more frequently among children without
recorded NNRTI-exposure (9.0% vs 6.4%), this trend was however not
statistically significant (p = 0.4728). The presence of other
NNRTI-mutations such as K103N (11.2%) in the non-NNRTI group indicates
that non-disclosed NNRTI-exposure might have taken place in some of
these patients, most likely as a result of PMTCT. Predictably, most
viruses from NNRTI-exposed children showed high-level resistance to NVP
(96.6%) and EFV (94.3%). Of note, more than a third of the children in
this group showed reduced susceptibility to 2 ^nd^ -generation NNRTIs
such as etravirine (37.3%) and rilpivirine (44.2%, Figure 2 ).

Figure 1

**Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) mutation
profiles.**

Profiles associated with failure to NNRTIs are depicted in white,
profiles associated with failure to non-NNRTI regimens are depicted in
grey. The numbers represent percentages.

Figure 2

**Prevalence of resistance to non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors.**

Prevalence of susceptible (S, solid bars), intermediate (I, striped
bars) or high-level resistance (R, dotted bars) to non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) at failure of an NNRTI-based
(n = 265, white) or non-NNRTI-based regimen (n = 89, grey). Eight
(n = 8, 8.2%) patients included in the NNRTI group were only exposed to
an NNRTI during a previous regimen. The numbers represent percentages.
Abbreviations: NVP: nevirapine, EFV: efavirenz, ETR: etravirine, RPV:
rilpivirine.

A detailed analysis of mutations associated with PI resistance,
stratified according to a PI or non-PI-containing regimen, is depicted
in Figure 3 and ​ and4. 4 . Most children (n = 245, 69.2%) did not have
any documented exposure to protease inhibitors, hence 80.8% (n = 198)
did not show any level of resistance to this drug class ( Figure 3 ). Of
the children without documented PI-exposure, 44 (18.0%) children showed
reduced susceptibility to boosted nelfinavir (NFV/r) ( Figure 4 ),
caused by polymorphism T74S mutation in all but one child ( Figure 3
).This T74S mutation is a known subtype C polymorphism. Reduced
susceptibility to NFV/r in the remaining patient was caused by N88D. A
further three children, without documented PI-exposure, presented with
medium to extensive PI resistance. One patient showed intermediate
resistance to 4 PIs, including LPV/r. Another patient presented with
high-level resistance to 4 PIs, including LPV/r, as well as intermediate
resistance to 3 PIs. The third patient showed high-level resistance to
all PIs except boosted tipranavir (intermediate resistance) and boosted
darunavir (susceptible). The resistance profiles of these three patients
indicate either undisclosed PI-exposure or transmitted drug resistance.

Figure 3

**Protease Inhibitor mutation profiles.**

Mutation profiles associated with failure to PIs are depicted in white,
mutation profiles associated with failure to non-PI-based regimens are
depicted in grey. The numbers represent percentages.

Figure 4

**Prevalence of resistance to protease inhibitors.**

Prevalence of susceptible (S, white), intermediate (I, grey) or
high-level resistance (R, black) to PIs at failure of a PI-based
(n = 93) regimen. Fifteen (15) children failing NNRTI-based regimens,
with known prior exposure to PIs were included in this group. The
numbers represent percentages. Abbreviations: IDV/r: boosted indinavir,
TPV/r: boosted tipranavir, APV/r: boosted fosamprenavir, LPV/r: boosted
lopinavir, SQV/r: boosted saquinavir, DRV/r: boosted darunavir, ATZ/r:
boosted atazanavir, NFV/r: boosted nelfinavir.

One third of the children in the study (n = 108, 30.5%) had documented
exposure to LPV/r, including 16 children who were exposed to LPV/r at an
earlier stage during treatment. In addition, one child failed a boosted
saquinavir-based regimen. Almost half of the children in the PI-exposed
group (n = 52, 47.7%) did not harbour any PI-related mutations. Fourteen
children (12.8%) harboured virus with reduced susceptibility to NFV/r
due to the T74S polymorphism in 13 patients, and K20T in one child.
Three children showed intermediate resistance to two, five or seven PIs.
The remaining 40 children (36.7%) presented with high-level resistance
to at least one PI in combination with various levels of intermediate
resistance to other PIs. Thirty-five of these children showed high-level
resistance to at least three PIs.

All children were exposed to 3TC, and the majority of them (n = 316,
89.3%) harboured the M184V/I mutation ( Figure 5 ). This mutation
contributed to high-level resistance to 3TC/FTC in the d4T (n = 255,
93.4%) and ABC-exposed group (n = 67, 82.7%, Figure 6 ). At time of
failure, children exposed to ABC demonstrated high-level resistance to
ABC (n = 50, 61.7%), while an additional 19 children (23.5%) presented
with intermediate resistance to ABC (n = 19, 23.5%). The presence of
high-level and intermediate cross-resistance to ABC in the d4T-exposed
group was observed in 22 (8.1%) and 235 (86.1%) children, respectively (
Figure 3B ). A large proportion of children remained susceptible to d4T
regardless of exposure to ABC (n = 63, 77.8%) or d4T (n = 204, 74.7%,
p = 0.6601, Figure 6 ). Most children remained fully susceptible to AZT
after exposure to ABC (n = 72, 88.9%) and d4T (n = 217, 79.5%,
p = 0.0712). The prevalence of complete susceptibility to TDF was
significantly larger in the d4T group (n = 214, 78.4%) compared to the
ABC group (n = 44, 54.3%, p\<0.0001). However, only 6 children (7.4%)
from the ABC group showed high-level resistance to ABC. The frequency of
reduced susceptibility to ddI was substantial in the ABC-exposed group.
Forty-nine (60.5%) children presented with high-level resistance and
another and 7 children (8.6%) showed intermediate resistance to ddI (
Figure 6 ). Resistance to ddI was commonly attributed to the L74V/I
mutation (n = 44). Despite the lower rate of high-level ddI resistance
after exposure to d4T (n = 25, 9.2%) an important proportion of these
patients still showed intermediate resistance to ddI (n = 91, 33.3%,
Figure 6 ).

Figure 5

**Nucleoside/tide Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor (NRTI) mutation
profiles.**

Nucleoside/tide Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor (NRTI) mutation profiles
associated with failure to d4T- or ABC -based regimens are depicted in
white and grey respectively. The numbers represent percentages.

Figure 6

**Prevalence of resistance to nucleoside/tide Reverse Transcriptase
Inhibitors.**

Prevalence of susceptible (S, solid bars), intermediate (I, striped
bars) or high-level resistance (R, dotted bars) to nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) after exposure to an ABC containing
regimen (n = 81, white) or d4T containing regimen (n = 273, grey). The
numbers represent percentages. Abbreviations: ABC: abacavir, TDF:
tenofovir, ddI: didanosine, d4T: stavudine, 3TC: lamivudine, FTC:
emtricitabine, AZT: zidovudine.

The presence of thymidine analogue mutations (TAMs) did not seem to be
affected by the nucleoside backbone with 19.8% (n = 54) of d4T-exposed
children having ≤2 TAMs compared to 11.1% (n = 9) in the ABC-exposed
group (p = 0.0970). The detection of ≥3 TAMs remained limited to 4.9%
(n = 4) and 6.6% (n = 18) of the patients in the ABC and d4T group,
respectively (p = 0.7942). Seven of the 13 children who presented with
TAMs after ABC-exposure were known to have received prior treatment
containing d4T; in three of them more than 3 TAMs were detected. The
preferred TAM-2 pathway was the most common pathway in both groups (
Figure 5 ). K65R was more common among children failing ABC-based
regimens (n = 10, 12.3%) compared to the d4T-exposed group (n = 5, 1.8%,
p = 0.0003). The Q151M mutation was only detected in 2 ABC-exposed
children (2.5%) and 6 d4T-exposed children (2.2%).



## Discussion

This retrospective study provides important insights into the HIV-1
antiretroviral drug resistance profile in South African children failing
prevailing 1 ^st^ -line ART regimens. Due to the change in the South
African paediatric ART guidelines in 2010 \[10\] we were able to compare
resistance profiles from children suspected to fail d4T or ABC-based
regimens. Overall, only a small subset of children (4.3%) did not have
any HIV-1 drug resistance mutations, which is comparable to findings in
some South African studies \[5\] , \[9\] , but lower than other studies
that showed a prevalence of 19--22% of wild type viruses \[6\] , \[7\] .
Since the absence of drug resistance mutations in children failing ART
is likely due to poor compliance, these differences between the studies
can be attributed to various adherence levels between the cohorts.

More than 95% of children, exposed to NNRTIs, showed resistance to NVP
and EFV, which is higher compared to the findings from other studies
\[5\] , \[6\] , \[9\] . Almost a quarter of the children without
recorded exposure to NNRTIs also presented with resistance to NVP and
EFV. This outcome might be explained by undisclosed exposure to NNRTIs,
either due to prior treatment with NNRTI-containing regimens or the use
of NNRTI-containing PMTCT-regimens. Alternatively NNRTI resistance can
be attributed to vertical transmission of antiretroviral drug resistant
virus. The observation of reduced susceptibility to 2 ^nd^ -generation
NNRTIs in one third of the patients is of concern, since it might
jeopardize the use of these drugs in 3 ^rd^ -line regimens.

More than 60% of the children exposed to PIs did not show any
PI-mutation, other than the T74S polymorphism. This polymorphism is
prevalent in 10% of subtype C wild type viruses \[17\] . The prevalence
of PI resistance in our study (30.5%) was very similar to that found by
others where the prevalence ranged from 36 to 44% \[7\] , \[9\] . The
three children who presented with PI resistance, without documented
exposure to PIs, have likely not disclosed previous treatment with PIs.
It is of concern that those children, who do present with PI-resistance,
showed extensive levels of resistance which significantly jeopardizes
future treatment options. Having said this, it is unknown, how many of
these children had prior exposure to full dose ritonavir, which is known
to cause more extensive PI resistance \[8\] .

The frequency of M184V/I and consequent high-level resistance to 3TC/FTC
is consistent with results found in most other South African studies
\[5\] , \[7\] , \[9\] . However, this finding does not significantly
impact options for 2 ^nd^ -line drugs, as M184V/I reduces viral fitness
\[18\] and often delays the development of TAMs \[19\] . This M184V/I
mutation also caused intermediate resistance to ABC in more than 80% of
the d4T-exposed children. Surprisingly about 75% of children remained
susceptible to d4T regardless of exposure to d4T or ABC. This finding
suggests that d4T or AZT can be viable options in 2 ^nd^ -line regimens.
Due to its toxic effects, the use of d4T in its current dosage is no
longer recommended by the WHO \[20\] . Nevertheless, if toxicity can be
reduced by lowering the dosage, d4T could still be a feasible option in
resource-limited settings, both for children and adults \[21\] . A
clinical trial to investigate this option in adults is currently
on-going in South Africa, Uganda and India (
http://www.wrhi.ac.za/Pages/ClinicalTrials.aspx ). The K65R mutation was
more often present in ABC-exposed children compared to those exposed to
d4T, which has recently been described by Van Zyl *et al* . \[22\] . The
development of TAMs is known to be more prevalent under thymidine
analogues, but the higher prevalence of TAMs in the d4T-exposed group
might also be explained by the longer treatment duration in this group.
Both the presence of TAMs and K65R has an impact on the NRTI options
available for 2 ^nd^ and 3 ^rd^ -line regimens. Due to the relatively
low prevalence of both TAMs and K65R, the majority of children remain
susceptible to AZT and TDF.

The most significant finding however is the increased frequency of ddI
cross-resistance seen in children exposed to ABC. More than 60% of these
children showed high-level cross-resistance to ddI, which was a
component of the 2 ^nd^ -line regimen in South Africa since 2010 \[10\]
. The frequent detection of resistance to ddI, major toxicity issues and
the difficult dosing schedule discourage the use of ddI. Our findings
strongly suggest excluding ddI from the 2 ^nd^ -line paediatric regimen
and replacing it by AZT and recycled 3TC as our data indicates that
88.9% of patients failing ABC-based regimens remain susceptible to AZT.
This recommendation has shaped the new guidelines for paediatric
antiretroviral treatment in South Africa where an AZT and 3TC now form
the 2 ^nd^ -line NRTI backbone for children failing ABC-based regimens
\[23\] .

This study has some limitations, in that it is a retrospective analysis
of routine laboratory data with limited clinical data. For those
children who had prior ART exposure, the reason for switch or the viral
load at time of switch was unknown. Occasionally, antiretroviral
treatment history might have been incorrect or incomplete, which might
have led, in some cases, to incorrect categorization of children as per
their ART exposure. In the absence of national HIV-1 drug resistance
testing guidelines, the dataset may be biased towards sampling children
under the care of clinicians reliant on HIV-1 drug resistance testing
for clinical management and may not provide proportional representation
of children failing ART in South Africa. However, these disadvantages
are largely overcome by the large sample size of the study.

To our knowledge this is the first report that compares the HIV-1
antiretroviral drug resistance profiles between children exposed to d4T
and ABC-containing 1 ^st^ -line regimens. The findings reported here
influenced the design of the 2013 South African ART guidelines and
ensured ddI is no longer a recommended antiretroviral agent for the
treatment of HIV-infected children in South Africa. The complex mutation
profiles observed in children failing NNRTI and especially PI-based
regimens, suggest that HIV-1 drug resistance testing is beneficial in
the paediatric population.



## Acknowledgments

The authors thank the staff at the HIV Genotyping Laboratory, Charlotte
Maxeke Academic Hospital, Johannesburg; especially Esrom Letsoalo,
Lindiwe Skhosana and Azwidowi Lukhwareni.



## Funding Statement

This work was supported in part by the NIH Fogarty International Center
awards 5 U2R TW007373 and TW007370. The funders had no role in study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.

