This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential
site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and
targeted advertising. To learn more, view the following link: Privacy
Policy

-   Skip to Article Content
-   Skip to Article Information

Search within This Journal Anywhere

-
Search term

-

Login / Register

::: {role="main"}

Journal of Medical Virology

Volume 87, Issue 5 p. 798-806

Research Article

Full Access


# HIV-1 transmitted drug resistance and genetic diversity among patients from Piauí State, Northeast Brazil

Maria Edileuza Soares Moura ,

Mônica Nogueira da Guarda Reis ,

Yanna Andressa Ramos Lima ,

Kelsen Dantas Eulálio ,

Ludimila Paula Vaz Cardoso ,

Mariane Martins Araújo Stefani ,

First published: 03 February 2015

https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.24087

Citations: 15

Find it @ Stanford

All authors declare no conflicts of interest.

This study was approved by the regional Institutional Review Boards
("Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa da Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da
Universidade Estadual do Piauí", protocol# 022/2011 and "Comitê de Ética
de Pesquisa do Hospital de Doenças Tropicais Dr. Natan Portela",
protocol# 16/2011). All participants were instructed about the study and
signed a written informed consent before interview and blood collection
for HIV-1 molecular analysis.

Sections

PDF

Tools

Share

::: section

## Abstract

HIV-1 transmitted-drug-resistance and genetic diversity are dynamic and
may differ in distinct locations/risk groups. In Brazil, increased AIDS
incidence and related mortality have been detected in the Northeast
region, differently from the epicenter in the Southeast. This
cross-sectional study describes transmitted-dru- resistance and HIV-1
subtypes in protease/PR and reverse transcriptase/RT regions among
antiretroviral naïve patients from Piauí State, Northeast Brazil. Among
96 patients recruited 89 (92.7%) had HIV-1 PR/RT regions sequenced: 44
females and 45 males, 22 self-declared as men who have sex with men.
Transmitted-drug-resistance was investigated by CPR tool (Stanford HIV-1
Drug Resistance/SDRM). HIV-1 subtypes were assigned by REGA and
phylogenetic inference. Overall, transmitted-drug-resistance rate was
11.2% (10/89; CI 95%: 5.8--19.1%); 22.7% among men who have sex with men
(5/22; CI 95%: 8.8--43.4%), 10% in heterosexual men (2/20; CI 95%:
1.7--29.3%) and 6.8% in women (3/44; CI 95%: 1.8--17.4%). Singleton
mutations to protease-inhibitor/PI,
nucleoside-reverse-transcriptase-inhibitor/NRTI or
non-nucleoside-reverse-transcriptase-inhibitor/NNRTI predominated
(8/10): PI mutations (M46L, V82F, L90M); NRTI mutations (M41L, D67N) and
NNRTI mutations (K103N/S). Dual class resistance mutations to NRTI and
NNRTI were observed: T215L (NRTI), Y188L (NNRTI) and T215N (NRTI), F227L
(NNRTI). Subtype B prevailed (86.6%; 77/89), followed by subtype F1
(1.1%, 1/89) and subtype C (1.1%, 1/89). B/F1 and B/C intersubtype
recombinants represented 11.2% (10/89). In Piauí State extensive testing
of incidence and transmitted-drug-resistance in all populations with
risk behaviors may help control AIDS epidemic locally. ***J. Med. Virol.
87:798--806, 2015* .** © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

HIV-1 surveillance programs should monitor incidence/prevalence,
subtypes distribution and drug resistance mutations among all exposure
categories, especially in high risk groups, such as men who have sex
with men, commercial sex workers and intravenous drug users (IDU).
Brazil has reported the largest number of AIDS cases and the highest
level of HIV-1 genetic diversity in Latin America and in this huge and
diverse country, AIDS epidemic reflects important regional differences
\[Brazil, 2013 \]. Although the epidemic has been considered stable,
over the last 10 years, from 2003 to 2012 an important increase in AIDS
detection rate (62.6%) has been observed in the Northeast region of the
country \[Brazil, 2013 \].

Successful antiretroviral (ARV) treatment, which comprises combinations
of nucleoside and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(NRTIs/NNRTIs) and protease inhibitors (PIs), is important to reduce
viral load and virus transmission \[Shafer, 2002 ; Shafer and Schapiro,
2008 \]. Distribution of ARV drugs by public health programs has been
scaled up, raising concerns about the selection of viral mutants
associated with drug resistance, as they can lead to virological
failure, secondary resistance and transmission of resistant strains
\[Shafer, 2002 ; Bennett et al., 2008 ; Wainberg et al., 2011 \].
Transmitted drug resistance (TDR) is an important public health issue
that can jeopardize reductions in mortality, morbidity, and transmission
\[Pineda-Peña et al., 2012 ; WHO, 2012 \].

The Brazilian AIDS epidemic is highly concentrated in the Southeast and
South regions and several studies from these regions have reported TDR
levels in different study groups \[Inocencio et al., 2009 ; Sprinz et
al., 2009 ; Sanabani et al., 2011 ; Ferreira et al., 2013 ; Pilotto et
al., 2013 ; UNAIDS, 2013 \]. However, there is scanty data on the HIV-1
molecular epidemiology in other regions away from the epicenter of the
epidemics. This is especially true for the Northeast region that
accounts for 88,830 reported AIDS cases with previous reports from only
three out of its nine states (Pernambuco, Ceará, and Bahia States) \[de
Medeiros et al., 2006 ; Pedroso et al., 2007 ; Arruda et al., 2011 ;
Cavalcanti et al., 2012 \]. Overall in Brazil, low to moderate levels of
TDR have been described, and recommendation of pre-ARV therapy
genotyping is restricted to pregnant women and to those infected by
patients under ARV therapy.

Aiming to reduce the gap in information about molecular characteristics
of the AIDS epidemic in Northeast Brazil, this study describes HIV-1 TDR
and subtypes circulating among ARV naïve patients, heterosexual and men
who have sex with men living in Piauí State. Recent official data show
133.9% increase in AIDS detection rate in Piauí State from 2003 to 2012
\[Brazil, 2013 \]. Data on the molecular epidemiology of HIV-1 from a
Brazilian region of increasing incidence of AIDS cases can contribute to
better preventive measures.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Study Area and Subjects

This is a descriptive cross-sectional study designed to investigate the
molecular epidemiology of HIV-1 among ARV naïve patients attending
public health services in Piauí State, Northeast Brazil (3,118,360
inhabitants; Teresina city, the capital: 814,230 inhabitants). Piauí
State is characterized by small agriculture-centered cities (soybeans,
rice, corn, and cotton) and livestock production farms. Approximately
half of patients included in this survey lived in Teresina and the
remaining ones came from 28 different small villages located throughout
the State.

In Piauí State, 3,958 AIDS cases were reported from 2009 to 2013 and
during the study period (August 2011 to May 2012) 96 consecutive cases
of HIV-1 ARV naïve patients were recruited. Patients were recruited in
Teresina while attending the Public Health Central Laboratory, which is
the reference health service responsible for performing CD4 ^+^ T cell
counts and viral load determinations. The study group represented 28.7%
of all ARV naïve patients (n = 334) that attended this reference center
during the study period. Inclusion criteria were: patients of both
genders, older than 18 years, with recent or previous diagnosis of HIV-1
infection, having no previous history of ARV exposure and living in
Piauí State. Standardized questionnaires were used by a trained person
to obtain socio-behavioral data by face-to-face interviews. Clinical and
laboratory data, including plasma viral load (bDNA; Siemens Medical
Solutions, Mississauga, Canada) and CD4 ^+^ T cell counts (FACSalibur,
Becton & Dickson, San Jose, CA) were retrieved from medical files at a
reference hospital (Hospital de Doenças Tropicais, Dr. Natan Portela) in
Teresina city.

### Genetic Analysis

HIV-1 RNA was extracted from plasma (QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit, Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany), reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA)
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and used as the target for a nested
polymerase chain reaction (nested-PCR) of *pol* region as previously
described \[Cardoso et al., 2009 \]. The entire protease (PR) fragment
and approximately 750-bp of the reverse transcriptase (RT) fragment were
amplified \[Frenkel et al., 1995 ; Kozal et al., 1996 \]. After
purification of amplicons (QIAquick PCR Purification Kit/Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany), genomic sequencing was performed (ABI Prism 3130 Genetic
Analyzer, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).

### Phylogenetic Analysis

HIV-1 subtypes were identified by REGA tool version 2.0 and by
phylogenetic inference using reference sequences obtained from Los
Alamos HIV database \[Oliveira et al., 2005 \]. Trees were generated by
Neighbor-Joining method under Kimura\'s two-parameter model using MEGA5
software \[Kimura, 1980 ; Tamura et al., 2011 \]. Bootstrap values
(1,000 replicates) above 70% were considered significant. The HIV-1
sequences with discordant subtypes in the PR and RT fragments, which are
suggestive of intersubtype recombination, were analyzed by SIMPLOT 3.5.1
\[Lole et al., 1999 \].

GenBank accession numbers of reference sequences used in the comparative
phylogenetic and SIMPLOT analyses are the following, for subtype B:
U21135, FJ638434, AY173956, K03455, EF379194, EF379210, FJ548795,
FJ548804, and U63632; for subtype C: AF110967, U46016, FJ548791,
FJ594149, AF286228, AF067155, and U52953; for subtype F1: DQ358801,
AF077336, and AF005494; and for the simian immunodeficiency virus
sequence from the chimpanzee (SIVcpz) used as an outgroup: X52154.
GenBank accession numbers of HIV-1 *pol* sequences described in this
study are KF700948-KF701036.

### Resistance Analysis

TDR rate was analyzed using the Calibrated Population Resistance (CPR)
tool (Stanford Surveillance Drug Resistance Mutation-SDRM) \[Gifford et
al., 2009 \]. Susceptibility profile of ARV mutations was analyzed by
the SDRM-2009 (Accessed: October/2013).

### Statistical Analysis

Continuous variables were described as medians with minimum and maximum
range. Categorical variables were presented as frequency and percentage.
Chi-square or Fisheŕs exact test were used to analyze the differences
among categorical variables, with a significance level of 5%. All
descriptive analyses were performed using Epi Info ^TM^ version 7 (CDC,
Atlanta).

::: section

## RESULTS

Among 96 ARV naïve patients recruited, 89 had both the PR and RT regions
of HIV-1 sequenced (89/96, 92.7%). The median age of participants was 34
years (range: 18--80 years), 45 were males and among them, 22
self-reported as men who have sex with men. Heterosexual unprotected sex
was reported by 64 patients and one participant was an IDU. The median
of CD4 ^+^ T cell counts was 424 cells/μl (range: 27--1,290 cells/μl)
and most patients (78/89) had HIV-1 plasma viral loads bellow 100,000
copies/ml (Table I ). Baseline and virologic characteristics of study
subjects are described in Table I .

Table I. Baseline and Virologic Characteristics of 96 HIV-1
Antiretroviral Naïve Subjects From Piauí State, Northeast Brazil

ARV naïve patients (n = 89)   Transmitted drug resistance (SDRM-2009) (n = 10/89, 11.2%)
---------------------------------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------
Gender
Male                                     45 (50.6%)                    7 (15.5%)
Female                                   44 (49.4%)                    3 (6.8%)
Median of age in years (range)           34 (18--80)                   36 (27--48)
Route of infection \[n (%)\]
Heterosexual                             64 (71.9%)                    6 (9.4%)
Female                                   44 (49.4%)                    3 (6.8%)
Male                                     20 (22.5%)                    2 (10.0%)
MSM                                      22 (24.7%)                    5 (22.7%)
IDU                                      1 (1.1%)                      1 (100.0%)
Unknown                                  2 (2.2%)                      ---
Median of CD4 counts, cells/µl (range)   424 (27--1,290)               380 (27--678)
HIV-1 RNA, copies/ml \[n (%)\]
\<10,000                                 39 (43.8%)                    4 (33.3%)
10,000--100,000                          39 (43.8%)                    6 (50.0%)
\>100,000                                11 (12.4%)                    2 (16.7%)
PR/RT HIV-1 subtype \[n (%)\]
B/B                                      77 (86.5%)                    9 (90.0%)
F1/F1                                    1 (1.1%)                      ---
C/C                                      1 (1.1%)                      ---
B/F1                                     4 (4.5%)                      ---
B/C                                      6 (6.7%)                      1 (10.0%)

-   ARV, antiretroviral; IDU, intravenous drug user; MSM, men who have
sex with men; SDRM, Stanford surveillance drug resistance mutation;
PR, protease; RT, reverse transcriptase.

Overall, the rate of TDR among patients from Piauí State was 11.2%
(10/89; CI 95%: 5.8--19.1%). Approximately half (5/12) of HIV-1 isolates
with resistance mutations were isolated from men who have sex with men
(Table I ). The TDR rate among men who have sex with men was 22.7%
(5/22; CI 95%: 8.8--43.4%) and among heterosexual males it was 10%
(2/20; CI 95%: 1.7--29.3%). Among women, TDR rate was 6.8% (3/44; CI
95%: 1.8--17.4%). However these differences did not reach statistical
significance ( *P* = 0.159). Patients with TDR (n = 10) had a median of
CD4 ^+^ T cell counts of 380 cells/μl (range 27--678 cells/μl); six
patients had viral loads between 10,000--100,000 copies/ml. Although
patients from this study came from 28 cities located throughout Piauí
State, TDR cases were concentrated mainly in the North and Central
regions, near the capital, Teresina (Fig. 1 ).

Mutation profiles of ARV resistant HIV-1 isolates and the level of
resistance to distinct ARV drugs are depicted in Table II . Most
isolates (10/12) had single class resistance mutations: PI mutations
(M46L, V82F, L90M); NRTI mutations (M41L, D67N); NNRTI mutations
(K103N/S, E138A). Dual class resistance mutations to NRTI and NNRTI were
observed among two isolates: first one (T215L-NRTI and E138G,
Y188L-NNRTI), second one (T215N-NRTI and F227L-NNRTI).

Table II. Amino Acid Substitutions in Protease and Reverse Transcriptase
Resistance-Related Codons of HIV-1 Isolates From ARV Naïve Patients With
Transmitted Drug Resistance From Piauí State, Northeast Brazil

Mutations                                                        Resistance profile
-------------------------- ---------------------------------------- ----------------- ----------- ---------- ---------------------- ------------------ -------------------- --------------- ----------
GenBank accession number   Route of infection HIV-1 PR/RT subtype   Sex/age (years)   PI minor    PI major   NRTI                   NNRTI              Low                  Intermediate    High
KF700966                   Hetero B                                 F/34              ---         **M46L**   ---                    ---                NFV                  ---             ---
KF700975                   Hetero B/BC                              F/46              ---         ---        ---                    **K103N**          ---                  ---             EFV, NVP
KF700988                   Hetero B                                 M/43              ---         **V82F**   ---                    ---                ATV, DRV,LPV         FPV, IDV, NFV   ---
KF700993                   MSM B                                    M/35              ---         ---        **D67N** ,V75I         ---                AZT, d4T             ---             ---
KF700995                   Hetero B                                 F/39              ---         ---        **M41L** , **T215S**   ---                ABC, ddI, TDF        AZT, d4T        ---
KF700996                   MSM B                                    M/31              ---         ---        ---                    **K103N**          ---                  ---             EFV, NVP
KF701005                   MSM B                                    M/48              ---         ---        ---                    **K103S**          ---                  EFV             NVP
KF701010                   MSM B                                    M/27              L10V        ---        **T215L**              V179E, **Y188L**   AZT, d4T             ETR             EFV, NVP
KF701014                   MSM B                                    M/43              ---         ---        **T215N**              **F227L**          AZT, d4T, EFV        NVP             ---
KF701030                   Hetero B                                 M/35              L10V        **L90M**   ---                    ---                ATV, FPV, IDV        SQV             NFV

-   PR, protease region; RT, reverse transcriptase region; MSM, men who
have sex with men; Hetero, heterosexual; M, Male; F, Female; PI,
protease inhibitor; NRTI, nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors; NNRTI, non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors,
ATV, atazanavir; AZT, zidovudine; ddI, didanosine; d4T, stavudine;
DRV, darunavir; EFV, efavirenz; FPV, fosamprenavir; IDV, indinavir;
LPV, lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; NVP, nevirapine; SQV, saquinavir;
TDF, tenofovir.
-   The resistance mutations are given in bold.

A clear predominance of sequences clustering with a single subtype was
observed (88.8%, 79/89) (Fig. 2 ). Among isolates with concordant
subtypes in PR and RT regions, subtype B predominated (86.6%; 77/89).
Non-subtype B isolates were rare: only one patient harbored subtype F1
(1.1%; 1/89) and one case of subtype C infection was identified (1.1%;
1/89). Moreover, B/F1 and B/C recombinant forms were identified in 10
female patients (11.2%; 10/89): F1 ^PR^ /B ^RT^ (n = 1), F1 ^PR^ /BF1B
^RT^ (n = 1), B ^PR^ /BF1 ^RT^ (n = 2), B ^PR^ /BCB ^RT^ (n = 2), B ^PR^
/C ^RT^ (n = 1), B ^PR^ /BC ^RT^ (n = 1), C ^PR^ /CB ^RT^ (n = 1) and
one CRF31_BC-like isolate. Recombination patterns of the mosaics are
presented in Figure 3 . Among 12 isolates with resistance mutation, 11
were classified as subtype B and one was a B ^PR^ /BC ^RT^ recombinant
form.

::: section

## DISCUSSION

In this study, moderate rate of TDR was observed in Piauí State,
Northeast Brazil, where incidence of both AIDS cases and related
mortality has increased significantly in the last decade. Men who have
sex with men presented a higher trend of TDR (\>20%) compared to
heterosexual male and female patients (∼10%). However, TDR rate between
men who have sex with men and heterosexual patients was not
statistically significant. Other studies including men who have sex with
men have shown moderate to high prevalence of resistance mutations
\[Cardoso et al., 2009 ; Bermudez-Aza et al., 2011 ; Karlsson et al.,
2012 ; Tupinambas et al., 2013 \]. Despite the increased risk for HIV
infection among men who have sex with men, extensive testing of
incidence and TDR level should be applied to all populations with risk
behaviors and not only men who have sex with men.

Increased concern about resurging HIV-1 incidence among men who have sex
with men had arisen on a global level, with high incidence rates
reported in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and the former Soviet Union
\[Bautista et al., 2004 ; Wade et al., 2005 ; Baral et al., 2007 ; van
Griensven, 2007 ; van Griensven et al., 2009 \]. In Brazil, the
prevalence of HIV-1 infection in this population group raised from 0.56%
in 2002 to 1.2% in 2007 \[Szwarcwald et al., 2011 \]. In the current
study, almost half of patients with TDR were men who have sex with men
and some of them (5 out of 22) reported bisexual behavior, confirming
their potential bridging role in the transmission of HIV-1 infection to
heterosexual women. The reasons for the apparently higher trend of TDR
among this group from Piauí are unclear and do not reflect time since
diagnosis as four out of five men who have sex with men with TDR were
not considered recently diagnosed or recently infected cases as their
date of diagnosis was before 2012. The longer the time since diagnosis,
the fewer the chances to detect transmitted resistance mutations.

The small number of men who have sex with men in the studied population,
limits further generalization. However, representative samples of high
risk subpopulations are a well-known surveillance challenge. High risk
groups have been usually under-represented in surveillance evaluations
and in targeted prevention programs. Men who have sex with men can still
be considered a "hidden" group as they may prefer not to participate in
surveillance studies fearing stigma and discrimination \[Heckathorn,
2002 \]. Local prevention and intervention programs on high risk
populations may be important to interrupt transmission of HIV-1 and TDR.

The overall moderate rate of TDR identified in the current study (11.2%)
is in accordance with reports from other geographical regions in Brazil:
11.5% in the Northern Tocantins State; 10% in the Central Western Goiás
State; 14.2% in the Southeastern São Paulo State, and 11% in the
Southern Santa Catarina State \[Cardoso et al., 2009 ; Carvalho et al.,
2011 ; Graf et al., 2011 ; Ferreira et al., 2013 \]. Two recent
multicenter surveys in Brazil have shown moderate levels of TDR
\[Inocencio et al., 2009 ; Sprinz et al., 2009 \].

In ARV naïve patients from Piauí State, singleton mutations to PI, NRTI
or NNRTI predominated (8/10); only two patients had dual-class
resistance mutations (NRTI/NNRTI): T215L (NRTI) and Y188L (NNRTI); T215N
(NRTI) and F227L (NNRTI). The most frequent NNRTI resistance mutations
were: K103N/S (30%; 3/10) that causes high-level resistance to
nevirapine and efavirenz \[Bennett et al., 2009 \]. Major PI resistance
mutations (M46L, V82F, and L90M) were detected. A previous study among
patients under PI-based highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART)
from the United States of America showed L90M as the most prevalent
(42%) resistance mutation \[Kantor et al., 2002 \].

Thymidine analog mutations (TAMs) are frequent in low-income countries
with ARV treatment based on fixed-dose combinations of thymidine
analogs. In this study, type I TAM (M41L) and type II TAM (D67N) were
observed. The M41L mutation occurred with T215S but M41L usually occurs
with T215Y/F mutations, causing high-level resistance to zidovudine,
stavudine and intermediate resistance to didanosine, abacavir, and
tenofovir \[Marcelin et al., 2004 \]. The T215S/N/L mutation was the
most frequent NRTI, identified in 3 out of 10 patients, two of them were
men who have sex with men. T215S/N is a revertant mutation that
indicates that the T215Y/F mutation was previously transmitted to one
zidovudine-naïve patient and that the virus reverted to a phenotype
closer to the wild type \[Mitsuya et al., 2008 \]. T215S/N has been
previously described in other Brazilian studies \[Frenkel et al., 1995 ;
Ferreira et al., 2011 ; da Silveira et al., 2012 \]. The D67N mutation,
detected in one patient, contributes to low-level resistance to
zidovudine and stavudine \[Shafer and Schapiro, 2008 \].The common
polymorphic accessory mutation E138A was identified in three HIV-1
isolates, two belonging to men who have sex with men and one from a
heterosexual female patient. This mutation can be weakly selected by
rilpivirine (RPV), a drug not available in Brazil, and it can decrease
susceptibility to RPV by ∼2-fold \[Xu et al., 2013 \].

The AIDS epidemic in Piauí State is characterized by low level of HIV-1
genetic diversity: more than 85% of the patients were infected with
"pure" subtype B. This finding contrasts with the declining trend in
subtype B prevalence reported in other Brazilian regions such as in the
south, southeast, and central western \[Cardoso et al., 2009 ; Cardoso
et al., 2011 ; Ferreira et al., 2011 ; da Silveira et al., 2012 \].
Teresina city is the only capital in the Northeast region which is not
located by the Atlantic Coast and therefore has limited touristic
attractions, a factor that may have contributed to the highly prevalent
subtype-B epidemic. In this study group, only two patients had "pure"
non-subtype-B viruses: one subtype F1 infected male patient that had
lived in São Paulo city, southeast and one subtype C infection detected
in a male prisoner.

These results indicate low northwards dissemination of "pure" subtype C,
which is prevalent in southern Brazil \[Vicente et al., 2000 ; de
Medeiros et al., 2006 ; Cavalcanti et al., 2007 ; Pedroso et al., 2007 ;
Cardoso et al., 2011 ; Cavalcanti et al., 2012 ; Delatorre et al., 2013
\]. Diverse B/F1 and B/C recombinants representing 11.2% of the viruses
were found where circulating "pure" subtype F1 and C isolates were rare.
In this context, there are reduced chances of subtypes B/F1 or B/C
co-infection or super-infection which is required for the generation of
recombinants. Therefore, rather than being generated locally, the B/F1
and B/C recombinant forms circulating in Piauí have probably been
imported from other Brazilian regions where they are frequent. The
results from this study also show that subtype C seems to be spreading
to Northeast Brazil as B/C recombinants, not as "pure" subtype C
viruses. Full-length or near full-length genomes of B/F1 and B/C
recombinant viruses can indicate whether they represent any of the
already described CRFs in Brazil or elsewhere or if they represent new
yet unidentified CRFs.

In conclusion, in this study the high subtype B prevalence and the
limited circulation of non-subtype B viruses, contrast with several
patterns of B/F1 and B/C recombinants. Moderate rate of TDR in this area
of increasing HIV-1 prevalence, highlights the need for surveillance
studies to monitor TDR level, which is considered the cornerstone for
pre ARV genotyping guidelines.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are thankful to the medical staff from the Public Health Central
Laboratory, Dr. Costa Alvarenga, from Teresina city for support during
recruitment.


##

Citing Literature

Volume 87 , Issue 5

May 2015

Pages 798-806

-

## Figures

-

## References

-

## Related

-

## Information

### Recommended

-
Recent trends and patterns in HIV-1 transmitted drug resistance in
the United Kingdom

A Tostevin , E White , D Dunn , S Croxford , V Delpech , I Williams
, D Asboe , A Pozniak , D Churchill , AM Geretti , D Pillay , C
Sabin , A Leigh-Brown , E Smit , the UK HIV Drug Resistance Database
,

HIV Medicine

-
Moderate prevalence of transmitted drug resistance and high HIV‐1
genetic diversity in patients from Mato Grosso State, Central
Western Brazil

Adriana Santarém Ferreira , Ludimila Paula Vaz Cardoso , Mariane
Martins de Araújo Stefani ,

Journal of Medical Virology

-
Phylogenetic analysis of HIV‐1 subtypes and drug resistance profile
among treatment‐naïve people in Kuwait

Wassim Chehadeh , Osama Albaksami , Haya Altawalah , Suhail Ahmad ,
Nada Madi , Sonia E. John , Priya S. Abraham , Widad Al-Nakib ,

Journal of Medical Virology

-
HIV primary drug resistance and associated HIV risk factors among
HIV positive blood donors in Brazil from 2007 to 2017

Carlos Henrique Valente Moreira , Tassila Salomon , Cecília S.
Alencar , Thelma T. Gonçalez , Ester C. Sabino , Liliana Preiss ,
Paula Loureiro , Maria Esther Lopes , Carolina Miranda Teixeira ,
Mariana Mundim , Anna Barbara Carneiro-Proietti , Cesar de
Almeida-Neto , Brian Custer ,

Transfusion Medicine

-
Genotypic tropism of antiretroviral-treated patients with drug
resistant HIV-1

Milosz Parczewski , Magdalena Leszczyszyn-Pynka , Anna Urbanska ,
Dorota Bander , Anna Boron-Kaczmarska ,

Journal of Medical Virology

Download PDF

back


## Additional links

### About Wiley Online Library

-   Privacy Policy
-   Terms of Use
-   About Cookies
-   Manage Cookies
-   Accessibility
-   Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
-   Developing World Access

### Help & Support

-   Contact Us
-   Training and Support
-   DMCA & Reporting Piracy

### Opportunities

-   Subscription Agents
-   Advertisers & Corporate Partners

### Connect with Wiley

-   The Wiley Network
-   Wiley Press Room

Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All
rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training
of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
