## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 . SplitsTree analysis of the HIV-1 Brazilian BF1 pol sequences (1231 nt) recovered from patients’ residents in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 1994 to 2005. The splits graph was constructed using NeighborNet methodology with pairwise distance input, which was estimated by F84 distance. Alignment was prepared with HIV-1 group M subtypes B and F1, as well as Brazilian CRF_BF1 forms (Los Alamos HIV sequence database). Eight clusters with at least three sequences that were subsequently found to share the same inter-subtype breakpoints are indicated. The scale bar indicates 10% nucleotide sequence divergence. Free branches indicate references sequences. Bootscanning plots depicting the relationship of BF1 inter-subtype recombinant clusters (1–8) are represented. Bootscan analysis was performed on a sliding window of 200 nt of the query sequences moving along an alignment of reference sequences by increments of 20 nt. Reference samples used for these analyses were: subtype B (BZ167, blue), subtype F1 (BZ163, red) subtype C (92BR025, orange), and subtype A1 (U455, green).


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 . Majority-rule Bayesian consensus tree of the int (864 nt). Posterior probability values are indicated only at key nodes. Samples were numbered according to the pr / rt classification. Samples from the present work have their branch highlighted in green. (*) indicates intragenic BF1 recombinant samples in the integrase region. Bootscaning graphic for each of the six recombination patterns is represented. Bootscan analyses were performed on a sliding window of 200 nt by increments of 20 nt. Reference samples used for these analyses were as follows: subtype B (BZ167, blue), subtype F1 (BZ163, red) subtype C (92BR025, orange), and subtype A1 (U455, green).


## Fig. 2

Fig. 3 . Majority-rule Bayesian consensus tree of the env-1 (404 nt) and env-2 (593nt). Posterior probability values are indicated only at key nodes. Samples were numbered according to the pr / rt classification. Samples from the present work have their branch highlighted in green. (*) indicates intragenic BF1 recombinant samples in the env-1 or env-2 region. Bootscan analyses were performed as described in Fig. 2 .


## Fig. 3

Fig. 3 . Majority-rule Bayesian consensus tree of the env-1 (404 nt) and env-2 (593nt). Posterior probability values are indicated only at key nodes. Samples were numbered according to the pr / rt classification. Samples from the present work have their branch highlighted in green. (*) indicates intragenic BF1 recombinant samples in the env-1 or env-2 region. Bootscan analyses were performed as described in Fig. 2 .


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 . Schematic representation of mosaic structures of six clusters of samples depicted in pr / rt analyses. Breakpoints patterns based on the analyses of the pr / rt (2277–3507 nt relative to HXB2), int ( 4230–5093 nt relative to HXB2), env-1 (6876–7282 nt relative to HXB2) and env-2 (7620–8209 nt relative to HXB2) regions. Subtype F fragments are represented in black, B fragments in gray and those fragments not determined (ND) are in white. (a) Indicate sequences with the same recombination profile as CRF28_BF and (b) CRF29_BF in all fragments analyzed in this study.


