# *In Vitro* Selection of HIV-1 CRF08_BC Variants Resistant to Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors

## Abstract

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) circulating recombinant form
08_BC (CRF08_BC), carrying the recombinant reverse transcriptase (RT)
gene from subtypes B and C, has recently become highly prevalent in
Southern China. As the number of patients increases, it is important to
characterize the drug resistance mutations of CRF08_BC, especially
against widely used antiretrovirals. In this study, clinically isolated
virus (2007CNGX-HK), confirmed to be CRF08_BC with its sequence
deposited in GenBank (
KF312642 ), was propagated in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) with increasing concentrations of nevirapine (NVP), efavirenz
(EFV), or lamivudine (3TC). Three different resistance patterns led by
initial mutations of Y181C, E138G, and Y188C were detected after the
selection with NVP. Initial mutations, in combination with other
previously reported substitutions (K20R, D67N, V90I, K101R/E, V106I/A,
V108I, F116L, E138R, A139V, V189I, G190A, D218E, E203K, H221Y, F227L,
N348I, and T369I) or novel mutations (V8I, S134N, C162Y, L228I, Y232H,
E396G, and D404N), developed during NVP selection. EFV-associated
variations contained two initial mutations (L100I and Y188C) and three
other mutations (V106L, F116Y, and A139V). Phenotypic analyses showed
that E138R, Y181C, and G190A contributed high-level resistance to NVP,
while L100I and V106L significantly reduced virus susceptibility to EFV.
Y188C was 20-fold less sensitive to both NVP and EFV. As expected, M184I
alone, or with V90I or D67N, decreased 3TC susceptibility by over
1,000-fold. Although the mutation profile obtained in culture may be
different from the patients, these results may still provide useful
information to monitor and optimize the antiretroviral regimens.


## Materials and Methods

### Virus strain and compound

A virus strain (2007CNGX-HK) of CRF08_BC was originally isolated from an
anonymous intravenous drug user (IDU) living in Guangxi Province in 2007
as previously described. ^16^ The patient was symptomatic and diagnosed
in the same year. ^16^ The isolated virus was quantified by a blue focus
units (BFU) assay as described previously. Briefly, virus stock was 3-
to 10-fold serially diluted with DMEM complete culture medium containing
25 μg/ml 2-diethylaminoethanol (DEAE) and inoculated to TZM-bl cells
seeded in a 96-well plate. The infected cells were incubated at 37°C for
48 h and stained with X-Gal solution. After 2 h of incubation at 37°C,
the blue cells were easily visualized and counted under light
microscopy. EFV, 3TC, and NVP were provided by Merck Research
Laboratories (Rahway, NJ), GlaxoSmithKline (Philadelphia, PA), and
Boehringer Ingelheim (Ridgefield, CT), respectively. All the drugs were
dissolved in DMSO and stored at −20°C until use.

### Full viral genomic sequence analysis

Viral RNA extraction, cDNA syntheses, nearly full length genome
recovery, and sequencing were performed according to our previous study.
^17^ Virus coding sequences (CDSs) were identified by online software
HIV Sequence Locator. The REGA HIV-1 Subtyping Tool (Version 2.0) and
Recombinant Identification Program (RIP) were used to confirm the virus
subtypes. ^18^ Genotypic resistance interpretation was also done using
the Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database HIVdb program
(version 6.0.11) ( http://hivdb.stanford.edu ). The viral genome
sequence was annotated and deposited into GenBank (accession number:
KF312642 ). 2007CNGX-HKV was used to represent the viral genome of virus
strain 2007CNGX-HK.

### In vitro selection of CRF08_BC-resistant variants to RTI

The isolated virus strain 2007CNGX-HK was used for *in vitro* selection
of virus variants resistant to NVP, EFV, and 3TC, respectively,
according to the methods described previously. ^17\ ,\ 19^ Briefly,
PBMCs (1×10 ^6^ ) were initially infected with 2×10 ^5^ BFU/well of the
virus in a 24-well tissue culture plate (in quintuple) and cultured in
1 ml medium containing diluted RTI. The starting and ending culture
concentrations were 1 nM and 128 μM for NVP, 0.04 nM and 2 μM for EFV,
and 0.1 μM to 64 μM for 3TC, respectively. One untreated well was
included as a negative control. At days 3, 7, and 10 postinfection,
virus titers in the culture supernatant of each well were detected by
BFU assay. Once the BFU number in drug-treated cultures was more than
20% of the untreated control, the drug concentration was increased
2-fold. When the BFU number in drug-treated cultures was less than 5% of
the untreated control, the selection was restarted. The selection for
NVP, EFV, and 3TC was carried out for 40, 30, and 22 passages,
respectively. One passage was around 10 days. Passages were performed
with the supernatant of the preceding passage and conducted using the
same rules as mentioned above. To monitor the development of the
accessory mutations under the pressure of NVP, virus variants that
developed known primary mutations were subcultured in duplicate or
quadruplicate. Culture supernatants of each passage were also saved for
genotypic and phenotypic resistance analyses.

### Genetic analysis of resistant variants

Viral RNA was extracted using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany) and reverse transcribed to cDNA with SuperScript II
Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to the user manual. The
entire protease gene and the first 440 codons of the RT gene were
amplified from viral cDNA by high fidelity AccuPrime Taq DNA Polymerase
(Invitrogen) with primer AV150 (5′-GTG GAA AGG AAG GAC ACC AAA TGA
AAG-3′) and polM4 (5′-CTA TTA GCT GCC CCA TCT ACA TA-3′) as previously
described. ^20\ ,\ 21^ PCR products were purified using the QIAquick PCR
Purification Kit (Qiagen) and analyzed on 1% TBE agarose gel to confirm
their size and purity. After purification, PCR products were directly
sequenced in both directions using the Big Dye terminator v3.1 cycle
sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems). The sequence results of each sample
were aligned and edited with the Staden Package ^22^ and submitted to
the Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database HIVdb program
(version 6.0.11) ( http://hivdb.stanford.edu ) for genotypic resistance
interpretation. ^23\ ,\ 24^

### Phenotypic analysis of drug-resistant variants

Phenotypic analysis was performed in TZM-bl cells containing the
luciferase reporter gene induced by HIV infection as previously
described. ^25^ Briefly, the TZM-bl cells in a 96-well culture plate
were infected with 400--600 BFUs/well of the virus and then added with
seven serial dilutions of RTIs in triplicate. After 48 h of culture,
luciferase activities were tested by the luciferase assay system
(Promega) according to the manufacturer\'s protocol. The 50% effective
concentration (EC ~50~ ) of each drug was determined from the curves
plotted by the percentage of reduction of luciferase activity against
serial drug concentrations. RTI resistance of virus variants was
expressed as the fold change (FC) of RTI EC ~50~ . The RTI
susceptibility fold change of virus variants was defined as the ratio
between the EC ~50~ of drug-resistant variants with the mutations and
the EC ~50~ of virus without the mutations.

The results have not only been compared to the mutation profiles in
several *in vitro* selection studies of subtype B virus and the
mutations summarized from large number of clinical patients in previous
studies, but have also been compared to the resistance mutations
displayed in the HIV drug resistance database of Stanford University, in
which the extensively studied subtype B and the most widely spread
subtype C are the most important component parts.


## Results

### Viral genome analysis

The nearly full length viral genome (8,962 bp) except for the 5′ long
terminal repeat (LTR) of strain 2007CNGX-HK was obtained. According to
the indications of the online software HIV Sequence Locator, the viral
sequence (2007CNGX-HKV) contained all the known viral genes, including
*gag* , *pol* , *vif* , *vpr* , *tat* , *rev* , *vpu* , *env* , and
*nef* coding for viral proteins p17, p24, p2, p1, p6, PR, RT, IN, Vif,
Vpr, Tat, Rev, Vpu, gp120, gp41, and Nef, respectively. RT was located
in 1,870--3,189 bp of 2007CNGX-HKV. The Rega HIV-1 subtyping tool
(version 2.0) showed that 2007CNGZ-HKV belonged to HIV-1 CRF08_BC as
determined by both phylogenetic and bootscanning methods ( Fig. 1 ). We
find that most of 2007CNGX-HKV was from subtype C except for small
segments that were contributed by subtype B. The mosaic structures of
subtype B and C in both 2007CNGX-HKV and the reference strain of
CRF08_BC (CNGX-6) were confirmed by RIP software and the recombinant
profile of 2007CNGX-HKV was similar to the reference strain CNGX-6.
Three segments from subtype B were found in the subtype C backbone and
the recombination points located at positions in the Gag, RT, and nef
regions of 2007CNGX-HKV and CNGX-6, respectively. Preexisting
drug-resistant mutations in the PR and RT genes of 2007CNGX-HKV were
analyzed by the Genotypic Resistance Interpretation Algorithm. No NRTI
or NNRTI mutation was found and the virus would be susceptible to RTIs.
Thus, 2007CNGX-HK was considered to be a representative member of
CRF08_BC and was used for *in vitro* selection to investigate the NVP,
EFV, and 3TC mutation profile.

### RTI-associated mutations and combination profiles of CRF08_BC generated in vitro

To characterize the resistance of CRF08_BC to RTI, virus variants of
2007CNGX-HK with drug-associated mutations were selected *in vitro* by
serial passages with increasing concentrations of NVP, EFV, and 3TC,
respectively. After around 40 passages of PBMC cultures in the presence
of NVP, three combination profiles of mutations were identified ( Fig. 2
). These profiles were initialed by three previously reported mutations
Y181C, E138G, and Y188C, ^26--28^ whereas 13 HIVdb program predicted
mutations ,V108I, G190A, H221Y, V106A, F116L, V106I, N348I, K101R, V90I,
D67N, E138R, F227L, and K101E, ^29--35^ six HIVdb program unpredicted
mutations, K20R, T369I, E203K, A139V, V189I, and D218E, ^36--39^ and
seven novel mutations, E396G, S134N, Y232H, L228I, D404N, C162Y, and
V8I, appeared gradually and formed combinations of up to four to six
mutations at the end of the selection. Two combination profiles led,
respectively, by two well-known mutations of L100I and Y188C were
selected by EFV. ^40^ To the end of the selection, two HIVdb program
predicted mutations V106L and F116Y, and a previously reported but HIVdb
program unpredicted mutation A139V, ^41\ ,\ 42^ were accumulated to form
the EFV combination profiles. 3TC induced only one combination profile
headed by M184I and accompanied, respectively, by D67N and V90I.

The most complicated and diverse mutation profiles were found in NVP,
followed by EFV, while the simplest profile was selected by 3TC. Among
all the selected mutations in this study, Y188C appeared in both NVP and
EFV combination profiles and served as the initial mutation. A139V was
also induced by both NNRTIs and emerged as accumulating substitutions.
Both V90I and D67N were selected as accompanied mutations by both NVP
and 3TC, although they are different kinds of RTIs. Among the
NVP-associated mutations, Y181C appeared in different profiles as
initial and accessory mutations. V108I and V90I were also accumulated in
different profiles but served only as accessory mutations. Between the
two EFV-selected mutation profiles, Y188C was found in both profiles but
emerged as initial and accompanied mutations, respectively. Figure 2
also shows that different secondary mutations would accumulate by the
same initial mutation and followed further by other mutations.

Mutations developed in the RT gene during the selection period are
summarized in Table 1 , including reported mutations with or without
drug resistance prediction by the HIVdb program and novel mutations.
Substitutions in the RT gene were compared with the conserved amino acid
of subtype B, C, and the CRF08_BC at the same position. Based on the
predictions of the HIVdb program and by comparing the sequences between
RTI-treated virus variants and wild-type virus, a total of 33 mutations
were selected in our study, including 26 reported mutations and seven
novel mutations. Twenty-two reported mutations and all the novel
mutations were induced by NVP. Five and three known mutations were found
in the EFV and 3TC selections, respectively.

Resistance patterns selected in the CRF08_BC virus in this study were
compared to that reported in the Stanford University HIV drug resistance
database. In this database, NNRTI mutation patterns were summarized from
15,832 clinical isolates containing at least one major mutation. For the
first 11 most prevalent mutation patterns, four (Y181C, Y181C/G190A,
G109A, and K101E/G190A) were detected in this *in vitro* NNRTI-selected
study regardless of nonmajor mutations. Database reported patterns
(Y188C, L100I, and Y188C/Y181C) were also found in this study. For the
NRTI resistance pattern, 3TC selected profiles (M184I and M184I/D67N) in
this work were also reported by the HIV drug resistance database.

### Phenotypic analysis of CRF08_BC virus variants selected by RTI

The phenotypes of virus variants selected by different RTIs were
determined by susceptibility assays in TZM-bl cells. Among three initial
mutations selected by NVP, Y181C showed the highest resistance to NVP,
which resulted in about a 105-fold increase in NVP resistance, while the
other two initial mutations, Y188C and E138G, reduced NVP susceptibility
by 60.9- or 5.7-fold, respectively. In the Y181C-initiated virus
variants, the additional mutation G190A and double mutations H221Y/D404N
and A139V/Y232H increased NVP resistance by 69.1-, 29.8-, and 25.1-fold,
respectively, while virus variants carrying additional mutations T369I,
V90I/V108I, and H221Y/E396G showed 7.0-, 6.4-, and 4.6-fold less
susceptibility to NVP. The other additional mutations V108I/K20R,
V189I/D218E, K101R/E203K, and N348I reduce NVP susceptibility by less
than 5-fold ( Fig. 3A ). For the Y188C-associated NVP mutation profile,
virus with substitutions of V106I and L228I increased NVP EC ~50~ by
over 10-fold, while accessory mutations V90I and F116L in this profile
reduced NVP validity by 5.9- and 1.2-fold, respectively ( Fig. 3B ). For
the mutation pattern led by E138G, additional mutations K101E displayed
12.1-fold less sensitivity to NVP and mutations V108I/F227L/C162Y and
V90I increased NVP resistance by about 4-fold. Variants with V8I showed
only 2.4-fold reduced susceptibility to NVP. Interestingly, mutation
E138R significantly decreased NVP susceptibility by 55.3-fold ( Fig. 3C
).


As shown in Fig. 3D , the EFV-induced initial mutations L100I and Y188C
conferred about 52.9- and 12.0-fold resistance to EFV, respectively.
Surprisingly, Y188C, as an additional mutation after the emergence of
L100I, showed strong resistance to EFV with increased EC ~50~ by
50-fold. The additional mutation F116Y reduced virus susceptibility to
EFV by 12-fold. After the appearance of the initial mutation Y188C,
virus variants carrying V106L had a great impact on virus resistance to
EFV (78-fold). Mutation A139V increased virus EC ~50~ to EFV by about
6.9-fold.

In variants selected by 3TC, initial mutation M184I alone strongly
reduced the virus susceptibility to 3TC by over 1,000-fold, while
additional mutations D67N and V90I showed less than 5-fold increased
resistance to 3TC ( Fig. 3E ). Taken together, a total of 25
NVP-selected, five EFV-selected, and three 3TC-selected mutations in
variants of CRF08_BC virus were found to be associated with different
levels of drug resistance ( Table 2 ). Based on the results of RTI
susceptibility, RTI-selected mutations could be classified as a high
(over 20-fold), medium (between 4- and 20-fold), and low (less than
4-fold) level of resistance to NVP. Six NVP-selected mutations or
mutation combinations (Y181C, G190A, Y188C, E138R, H221Y/D404N, and
A139V/Y232H), three EFV-selected mutations (V106L, L100I, and Y188C),
and one 3TC-selected mutation (M184I) resulted in high levels of drug
resistance (\>20-fold increase). The other 22 mutations in the selected
virus variants were associated with medium or low level drug resistance,
respectively.

Out of five initial mutations (Y181C, E138G, Y188C, L100I, and M184I),
four were associated with a high level of drug resistance and one
(Y188C) was selected by both NVP and EFV treatments. Novel mutations
Y232H and D404N in combination with other mutations A139V or H221Y
reduced NVP susceptibility over 20-fold, while other novel mutations
V8I, C162Y, L228I, and E396G each alone or in combination with other
mutations showed less than 20-fold increased resistance to NVP.

Drug resistance effects of the HIVdb predicted mutations in CRF08_BC
virus in this study were further compared with that reported in the
Stanford University HIV drug resistance database ^43^ ( Table 3 ).
Mutations K101E, V106M, V108I, Y181C, Y188C, M184I, and G190A in
CRF08_BC were associated with RTI resistance similar to that reported in
the database, but V106I and L100I in CRF08_BC might be related to a
resistance to NVP or EFV higher than that reported in the database.
Furthermore, the drug resistance effects of F116L, E138G, E138R, H221Y,
V106L, F116Y, D67N, and V90I were reported to be unknown or to have no
effect in the database, but these mutations in selected variants of
CRF08_BC showed high to low levels of drug resistance in this study.


## Discussion

In the absence of available data about the drug resistance mutations of
CRF08_BC in ARV treatment failure patients, we carried out this *in
vitro* RTI selection study on a clinically isolated CRF08_BC virus
strain in PBMC cultures and identified the patterns of mutations
appearing during the selection cultures, which may most likely also
arise in patients treated with NRTIs and NNRTIs. It is also necessary to
understand the differences between the emerging CRF and subtype B virus
in response to antiretroviral drugs and in drug resistance pathway.

To understand the genetic background of 2007CNGX-HK, the virus genome
was sequenced and confirmed to be CRF08_BC ( Fig. 1 ). The RT of
CRF08_BC was mainly from subtype C, but amino acids from 102 to 200 in
RT containing the polymerase catalytic site and the binding sites of
RTIs were recombined from subtype B. ^3^ Although we would not
anticipate distinct differences of resistance development in CRF08_BC by
comparison with subtype B, different combinations of subtypes in the RT
of CRF08_BC may provide genetic resources for potential genotypic and
phenotypic drug resistance. It inspired us to explore the drug-resistant
mutations in RT of this unique CRF.

In this study, although significant differences between NVP and EFV are
not expected, mutation preferences are confirmed to be different between
these two NNRTIs after statistical analyses with a large clinical
dataset. ^44^ For NRTI, d4T was not recommended for treatment because of
mitochondrial toxicity, whereas it was suggested that ddI be replaced by
3TC according to WHO. In fact, we had included AZT in our study, but the
virus failed to develop any resistance mutations. Some researchers also
reported unsuccessful *in vitro* selection of AZT-related mutations, but
additional studies indicated that cell lines (MT-2 and MT-4), in which
viruses replicate efficiently, were important factors for AZT-associated
mutation development *in vitro* . ^45\ ,\ 46^ Therefore, 3TC, rather
than PIs and NRTIs, were used in this study.

In this study, the virus strain was isolated in 2007 from a patient who
was diagnosed in the same year and was without treatment history. The
possibility of selecting the mutations from the preexisting minority
resistance population in the reservoir during our *in vitro* selections
is low. We terminated the selection experiment at 22, 30, or 40 passages
with 64 μM 3TC, 2 μM EFV, or 128 μM NVP, respectively. This was because
(1) the virus titer of resistant variants, cultured in the end point
concentration of RTI for about three to five passages, was still less
than 20% of the untreated control, so that it would be hard to further
scale up the drug concentration; and (2) the RTI concentration was also
equal to or higher than the end point of the other *in vitro* selection
studies. ^47--49^ All the mutations listed in Table 1 were not detected
in the parental virus or drug-free control in the end of the selection
experiment.

According to the HIVdb program, NVP-associated substitutions contained
five major NNRTI resistance mutations (K101E, V106A, Y181C, Y188C, and
G190A), two secondary NNRTI resistance mutations (V108I and F227L), two
NRTI resistance mutations (D67N and N348I), two common polymorphisms
(V90I and V106I), one uncommon polymorphism (K101R), and four unusual or
rare or uncommon mutations (F116L, E138G/R, and H221Y). K20R, E203K, and
D218E were not included in HIVdb but were characterized by analyzing
HIV-1 sequences from NRTI-treated and naive patients. ^36\ ,\ 37^ V189I
and T369I had been selected as additional mutations *in vitro* by
investigating NNRTIs. ^50^ T139V has been reported to be found in
subtype D virus and confers NNRTI resistance. ^39\ ,\ 51^

Surprisingly, seven mutations (V8I, S134N, C162Y, L228I, Y232H, E396G,
and E404N) were selected in the escalation of NVP, respectively. The
substitutions in the CRF08_BC virus selected by EFV or 3TC were less
complicated than those selected by NVP. For NNRTI-EFV-associated
variants, two primary NNRTI resistance mutations (L100I and Y188C), one
NRTI resistance mutation (F116Y), and one rare polymorphism (V106L) were
identified. NNRTIs inhibit HIV-1 replication by binding to the
hydrophobic pocket of RT and blocking polymerase activity. It has been
indicated that NNRTIs would inhibit viruses in different subtypes of
HIV-1 with the same mechanism. For NRTI-3TC-associated mutations, two
NRTI mutations (M184I and D67N) and one common polymorphism (V90I) were
detected.

Five (Y181C, G190A, H221Y, K101E, and V108I) of the 10 most common
mutations identified from NVP-experienced individuals ^44^ were found in
this *in vitro* selection study. Although the other five of the 10 most
common NVP mutations identified in HIV patients (K103N, A98G, V106A,
E138A, and Y188L) were not found in this study, other mutations at the
same position, e.g., V106I, E138G/R, and Y188C, instead of V106A, E138A,
and Y188L, were induced in CRF08_BC by NVP selection. V106A had emerged,
but it was not persistent through the end of the selection. The number
of mutations selected by EFV was less than that induced by NVP.

The second prevalent EFV-related mutation L100I ^44^ was detected in
EFV-selected variants of CRF08_BC. The common mutations resistant to EFV
(Y188L and V106M) were not found, but the other mutations at the same
positions (Y188C and V106L) were induced by *in vitro* EFV selection.
Thus, it is very possible that these mutations may be found in CRF08_BC
patients with NVP treatment. Attention should be paid to these mutations
in HIV patients on treatment. The most common NNRTI mutation in the
clinic, K103N, was not selected in our study and it was difficult to
provide an explanation. We also found that several previous studies did
not report K103N in their *in vitro* selection with NVP or EFV.
^26\ ,\ 48\ ,\ 52\ ,\ 53^ Although K103N failed to be selected in our
study, this popular mutation should be carefully monitored in patients.

After searching the references in PubMed, there were no reports of
clinical data on the effectiveness of first-line ART in Chinese patients
infected with CRF08_BC viruses, but potential mutations were detected in
treatment-naive patients. NNRTI mutations (E138A/K, V179T/D/K, V106I,
P236S/R, and M230V) and NRTI mutations (T69S/D, L210M/F, and A62V) were
found in CRF08_BC without treatment history and E138A/K were the most
commonly observed NNRTI mutations in volunteer blood donors from Chinese
blood centers. ^7^ Mutations on codons 138 and 106 were developed in
this study and a serious drug-resistant effect was also detected in
E138R and V106L. It is suggested that codon variations in amino acids
138 and 106 were highly related to RTI resistance.

Three distinct NVP resistance mutation profiles initiated by Y181C,
E138G, and Y188C and two different EFV-resistant mutation profiles led
by L100I and Y188C were observed in CRF08_BC *in vitro* selection. Y188C
was the major EFV-selected mutation and M184I was the dominant mutation
selected by 3TC, whereas diverse known resistance mutations (Y181C,
Y188C, and G190A) were detected in NVP-selected cultures. In several
previous studies of *in vitro* resistance selections, however, a single
mutation such as Y181C was reported to be selected and caused a serious
reduction in NVP susceptibility. ^26\ ,\ 48\ ,\ 53^ Mutation L100I was
also induced as the first mutation by EFV in subtype B virus in the *in
vitro* study. ^52^

Recently, complicated mutation profiles were observed in a novel NNRTI
(ETV) and distinct mutation profiles were detected in non-subtype B
virus by EFV and ETV. ^47\ ,\ 49^ Increasing attention was paid to
pairwise and higher order patterns of NNRTI-associated mutations because
clinically significant resistance to the first- or second-generation
NNRTIs was usually related to multiple mutations. Multiple mutations
could be detected in about 50% of patients who had developed at least
one NNRTI mutation. After analyzing 1,133 and 1,510 isolates of the
virus from patients who received only EFV and NVP, respectively, Y181C
with seven other mutations and L100I with three other substitutions were
found to be covaried significantly. Furthermore, Y181C was often
observed in virus variants with three or more NNRTI-selected mutations.
^46^ According to the above-mentioned study, the objective criteria and
justification for branching experiments were considered as follows:
virus variants would be subcultured in duplicate or quadruplicate when
the initial or major NVP-associated mutations (e.g., Y181C) was
detected, which may recruit other mutations as clustering variants in
the following culture.

To monitor the development of the accessory mutations in mutants from
early passages that developed known primary mutations (Y181C, E138G, and
Y188C), virus variants were subcultured in duplicate or quadruplicate.
The "branching" of experiments created additional room for the
development of covariation and clustering mutations with the pressure of
NVP. With the increasing concentration of NVP, known major mutations
(Y181C and Y188C) and E138G were first detected in parallel cultures.
According to a previous study, positively or negatively correlated
mutation pairs and clustering mutation development were found in
NNRTI-selected mutations, especially for G190A, Y181C, V108I, K101E,
H221Y, and F227L. ^44^

It seemed that initial or existing mutations might have some influence
on the emergence of the following NVP-related mutations. For example,
Y181C was proved to be significantly associated with G190A, H221Y,
V108I, A98G, G190S, and V179F by covariation analysis in a dataset with
13,039 sequences isolated from individuals carrying at least one NNRTI
mutation. ^44^ This is the first report that complicated mutation
profiles were selected by NVP and EFV by *in vitro* selection, which was
partially matched with the covariation phenomenon in clinical studies.
In addition, mutations at position 138 (E138G/R), which were considered
as rilpivirine (RPV) and ETR resistance, were induced by NVP in this
study. It is suggested that NVP-selected mutations at position 138 in
CRF08_BC would be cross-resistant to new NNRTIs. Moreover, the latest
study reported that E138G/R could interact with M184I to decrease RPV
and ETR susceptibility and compensate for RT enzymatic fitness and viral
replication capacity. ^54^ Considering the selections of E138G/R and
M184I in this study, we should pay close attention when patients with
CRF08_BC are receiving NVP/3TC-containing therapy.

We also compared the resistance patterns between our results and the
Stanford University HIV drug resistance database. Most of the resistance
patterns with major mutations found in this study were covered in the
database-reported clinical patterns. This indicated that it may be
possible to find these patterns in patients carrying CRF08_BC. For
non-database-reported mutation patterns that were observed in our study,
for example, E138G or E138R or V106L-containing profiles, they were also
important because a new pattern development may be influenced by new
genetic resources from difference subtype recombinations.

In this study, susceptibility assays were performed to determine the
phenotypic effect of different mutations in CRF08_BC ( Fig. 3 ). We
found that initial mutations Y181C, Y188C, L100I, Y188C, and M184I
selected, respectively, by NVP, EFV, and 3TC could cause over 20-fold
drug resistance. These initial mutations should be carefully monitored
in clinical studies. It was the first report that E138G/R selected by
NVP and E138R strongly reduced CRF08_BC virus susceptibility to NVP.
E138G/R was recognized as a mild mutation of the second generation NNRTI
ETR and RVP in *in vitro* selection or in patients with treatment
failure. ^49^ It is possible that E138G/R may develop in CRF08_BC in NVP
treatment and these mutations may cause 2- to 3-fold cross-resistance to
the next generation of NNRTIs. ^54^

Mutation V106L was induced by EFV selection cultures and displays over
50-fold resistance to EFV. The mutation at position 106 may severely
decrease NNRTI sensitivity (V106A/M) or just be a common polymorphism
(V106I). No report has shown that V106L confers resistance to NNRTIs,
although one study indicated that V106L in combination with multiple
mutations would be extremely resistant to novel NNRTIs but not to
current commercial NNRTIs. ^41^ A139V was observed with a gradual
increase of NVP and EFV. A139V alone resulted in less susceptibility to
EFV at a medium level, but caused high level resistance to NVP together
with a novel mutation Y232H. A139V was not characterized as a resistant
mutation in the Stanford University HIV drug resistance database.

Only one report indicated that 139V may be related to NNRTI resistance
in subtype D. ^39^ With the increase of subtypes and CRFs of HIV and
antiretroviral drugs, it is possible that an increasing number of new
drug resistance mutations and new resistance pathways will be found in
non-B-infected patients. Seven novel mutations were found in CRF08_BC.
The novel mutations alone, or together with other mutations, have shown
different phenotypic effects on NVP.

In the study by Iglesias-Ussel *et al* ., subtype B virus was used for
the generation of NVP-resistant variants with a 2-fold escalation of
drug concentration in serial passages. ^48^ The selection strategy was
the same as that in our study. Mutations V106A, Y181C, and G190A were
observed and Y181C caused a 100-fold decrease in NVP susceptibility,
while double mutations (Y181C/G190A and Y181C/V106A) were associated
with a 500-fold decrease in sensitivity to NVP. These three mutations
were also detected in CRF08_BC. Furthermore, Y181C showed a 105-fold
phenotypic resistance effect in CRF08_BC, which was similar to the
effect in subtype B. Since G190A in CRF08_BC decreased the effect of NVP
69-fold, Y181C in combination with G190A may be expected to cause
serious resistance (over 500-fold) to NVP similar to that found in
subtype B. In the other two previous cell culture studies, the subtype B
virus was adopted for resistant variants selection in fixed drug
concentrations (1 μM and 10 μM NVP) and a mutant carrying Y181C was
detected and also associated with a 100-fold decrease in susceptibility
in both articles. ^26\ ,\ 53^

In the study by Lai *et al* ., subtype B and C viruses were used to
investigate mutation pathways with 2- to 5-fold increasing pressure of
EFV in continuing passages. Multiple mutations and diverse pathways
(L100I/N348I, V179D/L100I/V108I, and K103N/Y188C) developed in subtype B
viruses, whereas G190A/V106M was the single pathway for the subtype C
virus. ^47^ By comparing the results with this study, the overlay
EFV-related mutations in both subtype B and CRF08_BC were L100I and
Y188C; no similar mutations were found between subtype C and CRF08_BC.
Because of similar previous studies and the heavy workload in our study,
we did not employ a control culture with the subtype B isolate employing
the same conditions we used with CRF08_BC. This might be a weak point in
this study because we could not observe the direct differences in
mutation patterns between CRF08_BC and subtype B.

At present, HIV monotherapy would be considered to be obsolete; hence
the applicability of results from single drug passage experiments to the
clinical choice or sequencing of antiretrovirals in different patient
populations remains unclear. In addition, the opportunity to investigate
possible antagonistic or synergistic effects of NRTI--NNRTI combinations
was not available in single drug passage experiments. The ability to use
single but not cocktail drugs to do the experiment was another
limitation in our study. Since 3TC in combination with NVP or EFV was
adopted in treatment for several years, we did not investigate their
possible antagonistic or synergistic effects in this study.

Without available treatment failure-generated mutations in CRF08_BC, the
findings in this study may provide some clinical suggestions for the
management of patients. If CRF08_BC is identified in a patient, NVP
resistance should be carefully monitored because NVP-induced mutation
profiles and the mutations seriously reduce NVP susceptibility as shown
in our study. Furthermore, E138R/G, the second-generation NNRTI-related
mutation, was identified under NVP pressure and may cause
cross-resistance to RPV and ETR. Cross-resistance would impose
restrictions on the choice of NNRTIs because the effect of RPV and ETR
may be reduced after NVP treatment failure or resistance to RPV and ETR
may increase due to the NVP mutations. All the resistance mutations
identified in this *in vitro* selection should be screened before the
selection of antiretroviral drugs and closely monitored even though in
treatment nonfailure patients who avoided complicated multiple mutation
profiles appeared.

In conclusion, our study has revealed that the evolution of a clinically
isolated CRF08_BC virus strain resistant to NVP, EFV, and 3TC can be
induced in selection cultures *in vitro* . Our results suggested the
possibility that initial mutations Y181C, Y188C, E138G, L100I, and M184I
might be found in patients harboring the CRF08_BC virus when NVP, EFV,
or 3TC was included in the ART regimen and these mutations might cause
high levels of resistance to the antiretroviral drugs. The mutation
profiles and the drug resistance level in this study were comparable and
partially consistent with those reported in other subtypes in both *in
vitro* culture and clinical patient pools.

Furthermore, the mutations of E138G/R, V106L, and A139V were first
reported to cause resistance to NVP or EFV and E138G/R will be
cross-resistant to a new generation NNRTI. Seven novel mutations have
been selected by the cultures in the presence of NVP in diverse and
variable combinations with the other major mutations in our study. This
phenomenon may happen when a rising number of patients infected with
different HIV CRFs come into therapy. These results may provide insight
into the development of drug-related mutations in patients and provide
useful information in adopting the ideal antiretroviral regimens to
control CRF08_BC in the future.

Go to:


## Sequence Data

The GenBank accession number for the viral sequence of virus strain
2007CNGX-HK in this work is
KF312642 .
