# Evolution of protease inhibitor resistance in the *gag* and *pol* genes of HIV subtype G isolates

## Abstract

Objectives

To analyse HIV Gag cleavage site (CS) and non-CS mutations in HIV non-B isolates from patients failing antiretroviral therapy.

Patients and methods

Twenty-one HIV isolates were obtained from patients infected with HIV subtype G during an outbreak in Russia 20 years ago. Most patients were failing antiretroviral therapy when genotyping was performed.

Results

HIV Gag CS mutations accumulated in protease inhibitor (PI)-resistant HIV isolates and were correlated with the presence of three or more PI resistance mutations. Only 1 of 11 HIV isolates carrying major protease mutations did not harbour treatment-associated CS mutations. Naturalpolymorphism 453T, often found in HIV non-B subtypes, seems to favour the selection of CS mutation 453I rather than treatment-associated CS mutation 453L. Resistance-associated non-CS mutations (123E and 200I) were also observed in PI-resistant clinical isolates. Non-CS mutations in the frameshift-regulating site, which controls the synthesis of Gag--Pol, did not affect frameshift efficiency in dual luciferase assays. Of note, one of four HIV isolates from patients failing PI therapies without protease mutations harboured Gag mutations associated with PI resistance (123E and 436R) and reverse transcriptase inhibitor mutations conferring resistance to the backbone drug.

Conclusions

HIV Gag CS mutations commonly occurred in HIV isolates from patients failing PI therapies and natural polymorphisms at the same position influence their emergence. Non-CS mutations previously associated with PI resistance were also observed in clinical isolates. Gag mutations might indicate the evolution of PI resistance even in the absence of protease mutations.

non-B subtypes , Gag cleavage site mutations , Gag non-cleavage site
mutations


## Patients and methods

All patients ( *n* = 21) were infected with HIV-1 during an outbreak in
Rostov on Don (Russian Federation) between the years 1988 and 1990.
These patients acquired nosocomial HIV infection during childhood.
^\ \ 8^ Plasma samples from 21 patients were obtained in the years
2002--06 during therapy failure (defined as HIV detection under
antiretroviral therapy) and analysed in the Pol region as well as in the
complete Gag region. Antiviral therapy regimens were mainly composed of
three antiretroviral drugs but non-standard dual therapies or
monotherapies were also used in single patients for different reasons.

RT--PCR amplification and sequencing of the viral PR and RT from plasma
were performed using the HIV ViroSeq genotyping system (Abbott) or an
in-house RT--PCR. The complete *gag* gene was amplified using LTR-A-f
(nt 687--706: CGACGCAGGACTCGGCTTGC) and C-gag1-r (nt 2382--2404:
CCAATTCCCCCTATCATTTTTGG), and sequenced (GenBank ID GU991863--GU991883).
*gag* sequences were assembled and edited using the Seqman software
module (Lasergene) and translated thereafter into amino acid sequences.
The sequences were aligned and a consensus sequence from these related
HIV isolates was built. Amino acid substitutions were identified
according to differences in comparison with the Russian consensus
sequence.

HIV frameshift efficiency was measured with a dual luciferase reporter
plasmid as previously described. ^\ \ 9^ The frameshift-regulating site of clinical HIV isolates was amplified \[p6-4-fs-KpnI (nt 2025--2059,GGGCTGTTGGTACCTGGAAAGGAAGGACACCAAATGA) and p6-5-fs-BamHI (nt 2139--2170,GGGCTGTTGGATCCGGCTGTTGGCTCTGGTCTGCTC)\] and introduced into the dual luciferase vector. Frameshifting was monitored by transient transfection
in C33a cells, which were grown for 48 h before being harvested.
Frameshift efficiencies were determined by dividing the ratio of the
firefly to *Renilla* luciferase activities from the clinical isolates by
the firefly to *Renilla* luciferase ratio from the in-frame pDual-HIV(0)
control construct.

Statistical significance was determined using Fisher\'s exact test or
*t* -test. Significance was considered at the 95% confidence level ( *P*
values \<0.05).


## Results

HIV Gag CS mutations significantly accumulated in HIV isolates with PI
resistance mutations ( *P* \< 0.05). In particular, HIV CS mutations
128I, 430R, 436R, 431V 451S, 452G and 453I were associated with major PR
mutations, whereas CS mutations 128A, 132F, 376V and 428D were also
detected in HIV isolates that had not been exposed to PIs. The number of
CS mutations was significantly higher in HIV isolates with ≥3 PI
resistance PR mutations compared with HIV isolates with 1 or 2 PI
resistance mutations (1--2 PR mutations 2.2 ± 0.7 versus ≥3 PR mutations
5.3 ± 1.1; *P* \< 0.001) (Table 1 ). Only one HIV isolate (patient 19)
with \>3 PR mutations did not harbour one of the most frequent CS
mutations (128I, 431V, 436R and 453I) and did not show changes in
comparison with a genotype obtained 6 months earlier. In two patients,
new PR and CS mutations developed during PI failure (patient 17: PR,
46I, 54V and 82A; and Gag, 128I, 375T, 431V and 452G; and patient 14:
PR, 82S; and Gag, 436R). Additionally, HIV Gag non-CS mutations were
detected in HIV isolates from patients failing PI therapy (123E, *n*
= 1; and 369H, *n* = 1) or in PI-resistant HIV isolates (123E, *n* = 3;
200I, *n* = 1; and 369H, *n* = 3). Within the frameshift-regulating site
p1, unique Gag non-CS mutations were found in one PI-resistant HIV
isolate (441R and 442R) and in one isolate without PR mutations from a
patient failing PI therapy (441R).



Patients were classified according to their current antiretroviral
therapy (PIs are underlined) and the detection of major PR mutations,
which are also underlined.

Therefore, we analysed the frameshift efficiency of specific Russian
sequences harbouring different p1 mutations. The majority of Russian
sequences had p1 mutations 441N and 443E in contrast to the HxB2
reference strain, which did not affect the frameshift efficiency (Figure
1 ). Moreover, mutations 440F, 441S, 441H, 441R, 442R and 449I found in
a few Russian HIV isolates from patients failing either PI or RT
inhibitor (RTI) therapies also did not change the frameshift efficiency
of these isolates.


PI failure without PR mutations was observed in four patients (patients
10, 13, 18 and 20) (Table 1 ). In two patients (patients 13 and 18) the
mutation patterns in Gag did not differ from other Russian sequences (RT
mutations: patient 13, 67N, 69N, 103N, 215L and 219Q; and patient 18,
69S and 219Q). In the third case (patient 10) unique CS mutations were
detected as well as non-CS mutations (76K, 79F, 81A and 441R) and RT
mutations (181CY and 184VM), which might indicate compliance or
resistance problems. The HIV isolate from patient 20 harboured
non-nucleoside RTI resistance mutations while the patient was receiving
only efavirenz and indinavir as antiretroviral therapy. Moreover, this
HIV isolate additionally carried CS (436R) and non-CS (123E) mutations
(RT mutation, 103N).


## Discussion

HIV Gag CS mutations accumulated in PI-resistant HIV subtype G isolates
and were even more prominent in HIV isolates harbouring ≥3 PI resistance
PR mutations. These results were in line with previous findings in HIV
subtype B isolates. ^\ \ 10^ HIV Gag CS mutation 431V was the most
frequent CS mutation in these subtype G isolates, which is in accordance
with previous studies analysing HIV subtype B. ^\ \ 10^ The occurrence
of 431V after or during treatment failure of lopinavir therapy regimens
is in line with phenotypic resistance data demonstrating lopinavir
resistance in HIV isolates harbouring CS mutation 431V and similar in
subtype B and subtype G isolates. Of note, one HIV isolate harboured
431V and 431I CS mutations, which might indicate either the reversion of
the substrate to wild-type specificities or the ongoing evolution of PI
resistance. The N-terminal Gag CS mutation 128I was observed in this
study twice in PI-resistant HIV isolates and was initially found in
PI-resistant HIV isolates without PR mutations, ^11 which were
selected after PI exposure *in vitro* . Additionally, CS mutation 128I
was selected *in vivo* in patients failing darunavir therapies. ^\ \ 12^
Therefore, CS mutation 128I might influence the phenotypic PI resistance
or at least lower the genetic barrier for the evolution of PI resistance
in at least subtype B and G isolates.

CS mutation 453I was only detected in PI-resistant HIV isolates,
suggesting an association with PI failure in this study, which is also
supported by its rare occurrence in treatment-naive HIV subtype B and
non-B isolates (\<1%). ^\ \ 13^ This mutation might be favoured in HIV
isolates harbouring the polymorphism 453T instead of 453P wild-type,
because CS mutation 453I is encoded by ATA and requires only a single
nucleotide exchange from baseline polymorphism 453T (ACA). In contrast,
CS mutation 453L (CTA), which is found in ∼24% of PI-resistant HIV
subtype B isolates, would only occur after two nucleotide changes. CS
mutation 436R was previously found to accumulate in PI-resistant HIV
subtype B isolates ^\ \ 10^ and was reported to confer low-level
lopinavir resistance in phenotypic assays. ^\ \ 5^ Accordingly, in this
study this mutation was observed in HIV isolates twice carrying major PR
mutations and once from a patient failing lopinavir therapy.
Additionally, CS mutation 436R was detected in one HIV isolate from a
patient failing indinavir therapy, which did not harbour major PR
mutations but another Gag mutation (123E) associated with PI resistance.
The role of HIV non-CS mutations (76K, 79F and 81A) in one of these
subtype G isolates from patients failing nelfinavir therapy, which were
most recently described in a PI-resistant subtype B isolate, ^\ \ 3^ has
to be determined in further studies.

Non-CS mutations 123E and 200I were selected *in vitro* after exposure
of HIV isolates to PIs, and these HIV isolates displayed phenotypic PI
resistance in the absence of PR mutations. To our knowledge, both mutations have been observed in clinical HIV isolates carrying major PR mutations for the first time in this study.
The occurrence of these mutations *in vitro* and *in vivo* underlines
the need for further studies clarifying the mechanism of resistance.
Even though unique mutations were observed in the frameshift-regulating
site, especially in PI-resistant HIV isolates, the frameshift efficiency
was not affected. Therefore, the theoretical mechanism of resistance
conferred by an increased amount of viral enzymes due to increased
frameshift efficiency does not hold true for these HIV isolates.

In summary, Gag CS mutations were correlated with the presence of PI
resistance PR mutations in these subtype G isolates, supporting the fact
that in PI resistance PR and CS mutations seem to be two sides of the
same coin. The impact of HIV Gag mutations in the absence of PR
mutations is still a matter of debate. Since single CS mutations only
conferred low-level PI resistance, the presence of one CS mutation would
hardly explain the failure of boosted PI therapy regimens. However, here
the failure of at least one PI therapy might be related to Gag mutations
in the absence of major PR mutations.


