# Evolution of Integrase Resistance During Failure of Integrase Inhibitor-Based Antiretroviral Therapy

Hiroyu Hatano , ^1^ Harry Lampiris , ^1,^ ^2^ Signe Fransen , ^3^ Soumi
Gupta , ^3^ Wei Huang , ^3^ Rebecca Hoh , ^1^ Jeffrey N. Martin , ^1^
Jacob Lalezari , ^4^ David Bangsberg , ^5^ Christos Petropoulos , ^3^
and Steven G. Deeks ^1^

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer

The publisher\'s final edited version of this article is available at J
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr



## Abstract

### Background

Although integrase inhibitors are highly effective in the management of
drug-resistant HIV, some patients fail to achieve durable viral
suppression. The long-term consequences of integrase inhibitor failure
have not been well-defined.

### Methods

We identified 29 individuals who exhibited evidence of incomplete viral
suppression on a regimen containing an integrase inhibitor (23
raltegravir, 6 elvitegravir). Prior to initiating the integrase
inhibitor-based regimen, the median CD4+ T cell count and plasma HIV RNA
levels were 62 cells/mm ^3^ and 4.65 log ~10~ copies/mL, respectively.

### Results

At the first failure time-point, the most common integrase resistance
pattern for subjects taking raltegravir was wild-type, followed in order
of frequency by Q148H/K/R+G140S, N155H, and Y143R/H/C. The most common
resistance pattern for subjects taking elvitegravir was E92Q. Long-term
failure was associated with continued viral evolution, emergence of
high-level phenotypic resistance, and a decrease in replicative
capacity.

### Conclusions

Although wild-type failure during early integrase inhibitor failure is
common, most patients eventually develop high level phenotypic drug
resistance. This resistance evolution is gradual and associated with
declines in replicative capacity.

**Keywords:** integrase inhibitors, drug resistance, virologic failure



## INTRODUCTION

The management of drug-resistant HIV has improved dramatically with the
recent approval of a number of highly effective antiretroviral drugs ^1^
^--^ ^4^ . Among these is raltegravir ^5^ , the first clinically
available inhibitor of HIV integrase. When used in combination with
other active drugs, raltegravir has proven to be very potent,
well-tolerated, and highly effective ^6^ ^--^ ^9^ .

Due to the limited number of patients exhibiting virologic failure in
clinical trials of raltegravir, the long-term consequences of incomplete
viral suppression while taking an integrase inhibitor have not been well
defined. Among the subjects who had evidence of virologic failure in the
phase III raltegravir studies (BENCHMRK), 68% had at least one
raltegravir resistance mutation ^8^ . However, the longitudinal changes
in integrase inhibitor resistance were not described in this study. We
present here a cohort of treatment-experienced subjects who exhibited
evidence of incomplete viral suppression while taking an integrase
inhibitor.



## METHODS

### Study Participants

All subjects were enrolled in an ongoing, observational cohort based in
San Francisco (SCOPE cohort). Subjects who received an integrase
inhibitor (raltegravir or elvitegravir) were identified. Subjects
enrolled in SCOPE are typically seen every four months. At each visit,
an extensive interview is performed and plasma and other biologic
specimens are obtained and stored. Adherence was measured by asking
subjects the number of missed doses of each antiretroviral drug in the
previous 30 days. Virologic failure was defined as either: 1) developing
detectable viremia after achieving viral suppression, or 2) failure to
achieve viral suppression. The SCOPE study was approved by the
University of California San Francisco Committee on Human Research. All
subjects provided written informed consent.

### Integrase inhibitor resistance testing

All resistance testing was performed at Monogram Biosciences. Genotypic
and phenotypic resistance testing was performed in subjects with
detectable viremia. Genotypic resistance measurements were performed
using the GeneSeqR Integrase assay, in which patient-derived integrase
coding sequences were determined using conventional dye-deoxy chain
terminator chemistry (ABI, Foster City, CA). Mutations were identified
based on the most recent International AIDS Society-USA guidelines ^10^
. Primary integrase inhibitor mutations were defined as Y143R/H/C,
Q148H/K/R, or N155H. Secondary mutations were defined as L74M, E138A/K,
G140S, E92Q, T97A, G163K/R, V151I, or D232N. Integrase sequences have
been submitted to GenBank.

Phenotypic susceptibility to raltegravir was determined using
PhenoSense® Integrase. Briefly, integrase sequences were amplified from
patient plasma by RT-PCR and transferred into a resistance test vector
containing a luciferase reporter gene. Pseudotyped virus containing
patient-derived integrase was used to infect HEK293 cells in the
presence and absence of serial dilutions of raltegravir. Susceptibility
was reported as the fold-change in IC ~50~ (ratio of IC ~50~ of the
sample virus to the IC ~50~ of a reference strain \[NL4-3\]). In
addition, replication capacity was determined and expressed as the
percent of viral infectivity as measured by luciferase production, in
the absence of drug compared to a reference strain (NL4-3).



## RESULTS

### Baseline characteristics prior to integrase inhibitor therapy

A total of 79 subjects enrolled in the SCOPE cohort initiated an
integrase inhibitor based regimen (73 raltegravir and 6 elvitegravir).
Integrase genotypic and phenotypic resistance testing was performed
prior to integrase inhibitor therapy in 45/79 subjects; the median
fold-change in IC ~50~ to raltegravir was 0.89. The median replicative
capacity was 114%. Four of 45 subjects had a secondary integrase
inhibitor associated mutation at baseline (1 subject with E138K, 3
subjects with V151I) ^10^ ; there were no primary integrase mutations.

### Integrase inhibitor resistance at first virologic failure

Among the 79 subjects who initiated an integrase inhibitor based
regimen, 50 had evidence of durable viral suppression. The remaining 29
subjects (23 raltegravir, 6 elvitegravir) failed to achieve and maintain
an undetectable viral load and were included in the failure analyses.
Prior to initiating an integrase inhibitor based regimen, the median
baseline CD4+ T cell count and plasma HIV RNA level was 62 cells/mm ^3^
and 4.65 log ~10~ copies/mL, respectively ( Table 1 ). The cohort was
highly treatment-experienced and was followed for a median 15.8 months.
The median CD4+ T cell count and plasma HIV RNA level at the time of
first virologic failure was 118 cells/mm ^3^ and 4.44 log ~10~ copies
RNA/mL, respectively. Subjects had been on an integrase inhibitor for a
median 4.9 months at the time of first virologic failure.

### TABLE 1

Baseline Characteristics, Integrase Inhibitor Failure Cohort (n=29)

Gender

93% Male, 3% Female, 3% Male-to-female

Age (years)

47 (45--50)

CD4+ T cell count (cells/mm ^3^ )

62 (8--268)

Plasma HIV RNA (log ~10~ copies/mL)

4.65 (4.12--5.36)

Number of prior ARV

12 (9--16)

Number of prior ARV drug classes

4 (3--4)

Duration of follow-up (months)

15.8 (12.4--17.5)

Open in a separate window

Data are medians with interquartile ranges (IQR). ARV=antiretroviral
drugs.

Nineteen of the 23 subjects who exhibited incomplete viral suppression
on a raltegravir-based regimen had at least one genotypic/phenotypic
resistance tested performed after a median 4.1 months of therapy. At the
first failure time-point, the most common integrase genotype was
wild-type (no known primary mutations, n=13), followed in order of
frequency by Q148H/K/R (n=3), N155H (n=3), and Y143R/H/C (n=1) (notably,
one subject had a mixture of resistant virus subpopulations that
contained mutations at either codon 148 or 155). The G140S was present
in four subjects, typically in association with Q148H/K/R. The E92Q
mutation was observed in one raltegravir failure, which also contained
mixtures of resistant virus at codons 148, 155, and 140. The median
viral load in subjects failing with wild-type versus resistant integrase
was 3.86 and 4.28 log ~10~ copies/mL, respectively ( *p* =0.177).

We also identified six subjects who were participants in a phase II
study of elvitegravir. The most common integrase resistance mutation at
the first failure time-point was E92Q (3/5 subjects with available
genotypes, while the remaining 2 subjects had wild-type virus). The E92Q
mutation was associated with low-level phenotypic resistance to
raltegravir.

### Absence of integrase inhibitor resistance in "blippers"

Six of 50 subjects who had viral suppression on a raltegravir-based
regimen had episodes of detectable viremia \< 1000 copies/mL during
otherwise effective therapy (median 177 copies/mL, IQR 71--300). Virus
was successfully amplified from at least one time-point for 5/6 of these
subjects and found to have no genotypic or phenotypic evidence of
resistance to raltegravir.

### Evolution of integrase inhibitor resistance over time

The genotypic and phenotypic level of integrase resistance increased
gradually over time among subjects who remained on an integrase
inhibitor-based regimen despite persistent viremia. The proportion of
viruses lacking primary or secondary integrase resistance mutations
declined at each subsequent time-point, while the proportion of viruses
with more than one integrase mutation increased ( Fig. 1A ). Similar
changes were observed in the evolution of phenotypic resistance ( Fig.
1B ). Moreover, the level of phenotypic resistance to raltegravir in
subjects failing with either the Q148H/K/R or Y143R/H/C mutations was
consistently high (\> 100 fold-change in IC ~50~ ), whereas the level of
phenotypic resistance to raltegravir was much lower in those failing
with the N155H mutation (\< 50 fold-change in IC ~50~ ).

Figure 1

Incomplete viral suppression on an integrase inhibitor based regimen is
associated with continued viral evolution, as defined by the number of
primary and secondary integrase mutations present at each consecutive
visit (Panel A) and by the level of phenotypic resistance (Panel B). All
subjects who had incomplete viral suppression and who remained on an
integrase inhibitor-based regimen and who had interpretable genotypic
resistance data are shown in Panel A (n=23, 25, 20 and 13 at baseline
and visits 1--3, respectfully). All subjects who eventually developed
evidence of integrase resistance are shown in Panel B (n=11).

### Role of adherence in predicting resistance during failure

We next assessed the relationship between adherence and the risk of
virologic failure and integrase inhibitor resistance. The cohort was
divided into three groups: subjects who had durable virologic success
(including those with episodes of detectable viremia \< 1000 copies/mL
during otherwise effective therapy), subjects who exhibited virologic
failure with at least one primary integrase inhibitor associated
mutation, and subjects who failed without any integrase inhibitor
mutations. The average self-reported level of adherence in the previous
30 days to all antiretroviral drug doses was 97.8% in subjects who had
durable virologic success, 98.7% in subjects who failed with integrase
inhibitor resistance, and 90.7% in subjects who failed with wild-type
virus (Wilcoxon rank-sum test: *p* =0.004 for wild-type failure vs.
success, *p* =0.007 for wild-type failure vs. resistance failure). The
findings were similar when the analyses were limited to adherence to
integrase inhibitor doses (data not shown).

### Replicative capacity

There were no obvious differences in the replicative capacity of viruses
containing the Y143R/H/C, Q148H/K/R, or N155H mutations (data not
shown), although the number of subjects in each group was limited. Among
the subjects who developed clear evidence of integrase inhibitor
resistance (n=11, Fig. 1B ), there appeared to be a decline in integrase
replicative capacity over time ( Fig. 2B ). In contrast, there was no
consistent change in replicative capacity among those who failed without
evidence of integrase inhibitor resistance (data not shown). Moreover,
for the 10 subjects who developed phenotypic/genotypic evidence of
integrase inhibitor resistance and had pre-/post-failure samples
available, the median decrease in replicative capacity between the
pre-integrase inhibitor baseline and the last failure time-point was 45%
( *p* = 0.0002; Fig. 2A ).

Figure 2

Evolution of integrase replicative capacity. Among subjects failing with
integrase inhibitor resistance, there was a decrease in replicative
capacity between pre-therapy baseline and the last failure time-point on
drug (n=10, Panel A). Long-term virologic failure of an integrase
inhibitor based regimen is associated with a decrease in replicative
capacity (n=11, Panel B).

### Raltegravir treatment interruption and possible continued partial benefit

One individual harboring a virus with the N155H + V151I + D232N
mutations (41-fold change in IC ~50~ ) discontinued raltegravir while
remaining on a stable background regimen. In contrast to most of the
other subjects in the cohort, this individual never had evidence of
advanced HIV disease (pre-integrase inhibitor CD4+ T cell count and
plasma viral load of 331 cells/mm ^3^ and 4.07 log ~10~ copies/mL,
respectively). After an initial virologic response to raltegravir, the
subject's viral load rebounded to a steady-state level of approximately
4 log ~10~ copies/mL. Because of concerns of ongoing viral evolution and
relatively preserved CD4+ T cell counts, raltegravir was interrupted in
an attempt to preserve this class for future antiretroviral regimens.
Interestingly, plasma HIV RNA levels remained relatively stable for one
week in the absence of raltegravir, suggesting limited residual
antiviral activity ( Fig. 3A ). However, viral load subsequently
increased by 10-fold as genotypic/phenotypic evidence for raltegravir
resistance waned over the next month. In addition, replicative capacity
increased as the raltegravir inhibitor mutations waned ( Fig. 3B ).

Figure 3

Interruption of raltegravir. One individual harboring a virus with the
N155H + V151I + D232N mutations (41-fold change in IC50) discontinued
raltegravir while remaining on a stable background regimen. Shaded area
indicates the period when raltegravir was stopped. Change in plasma HIV
RNA levels are shown in Panel A; the time-point when raltegravir
resistance mutations waned is marked by an arrow. Change in raltegravir
phenotypic susceptibility and replicative capacity are shown in Panel B.



## DISCUSSION

Although experience from clinical trials indicates that the vast
majority of patients receiving a raltegravir-based regimen do well,
there remains a poorly defined subset of patients for whom these drugs
fail to fully suppress viral replication. Here, we report on our
experiences with patients who exhibited incomplete viral suppression on
an integrase inhibitor based regimen. As has been reported before,
certain key "signature" mutations were commonly observed (Q148H/K/R \>
N155H \> Y143R/H/C) ^10^ , and when present were associated with marked
decreases in phenotypic susceptibility. However, in contrast to
expectations for a drug which is considered to have a low "genetic
barrier" to resistance, resistance to this drug emerged gradually, with
most subjects having no genotypic or phenotypic evidence of integrase
inhibitor resistance during early virologic failure. Among those
patients who remained on an integrase inhibitor despite detectable
viremia, high-level resistance invariably emerged. This viral evolution
is consistent with what has been observed with other antiretroviral
drugs (particularly some of the nucleoside analogues and protease
inhibitors), and suggests that early efforts to modify therapy (or at
least interrupt the integrase inhibitor) may preserve future options
within this class.

The complex interaction between resistance, viral fitness, and
persistent antiviral activity differs between each of the therapeutic
drug classes. Some antiretroviral drugs exhibit clear benefit in the
face of drug resistance (e.g, nucleoside analogues), while other drugs
have limited or no residual activity (e.g., first generation
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors). Knowledge regarding
how to use integrase inhibitors in the context of resistance is
necessary, as there will always likely be a subset of patients who have
failed all drug classes and have limited options for complete viral
suppression. In our study, we observed that long-term failure of
integrase inhibitors was associated with sustained decreases in
integrase replicative capacity. This decrease may in theory confer some
benefit in a partially suppressive regimen. We also observed a rapid
increase in viremia after removal of raltegravir in a patient who had
developed resistance (N155H) to this drug. This increase in viremia
appeared to occur as genotypic/phenotypic evidence for raltegravir
resistance waned, suggesting a possible "fitness benefit." Notably, this
is consistent with observations from the SIV-infected macaque model,
where removal of an integrase inhibitor in animals harboring the N155H
mutation was associated with initial stable viremia, followed by
increases in viremia as the mutation waned ^11^ . Our data, however, are
inconsistent with a recent report of 5 subjects with raltegravir failure
whose plasma HIV RNA levels remained stable after discontinuation of
raltegravir ^12^ . Clearly, more data are necessary to define to what
degree integrase inhibitors have residual activity in the context of
resistance.

As has been reported for protease inhibitors in the past, integrase
inhibitor resistance appeared to occur only in the presence of high
levels of adherence ^13^ . Since self-report adherence measurements are
often imprecise, it is possible that the subjects failing with wild-type
were taking less of their therapy than stated, but it is unlikely that
most of these subjects had completely interrupted their medication.
Given the fitness costs associated with integrase inhibitor-associated
mutations, it is possible that the negative impact of genotypic
mutations on replicative capacity may outweigh the positive impact of
these mutations on drug-susceptibility in the context of low-to-moderate
levels of drug exposure ^13^ .

In summary, in this cohort of highly treatment-experienced subjects
failing an integrase inhibitor containing regimen, wild-type failure was
relatively common (particularly during early failure), but high-level
genotypic and phenotypic resistance eventually emerged in most subjects
who remained on therapy. Whether early modification of a failing regimen
can preserve raltegravir (and other integrase inhibitors) remains to be
defined. The challenging decision of whether to continue raltegravir in
patients who have limited options for complete viral suppression will
for now depend upon a patient's specific clinical scenario.



## Acknowledgments

***Financial support*** . This work was supported by grants from the
NIAID (K23AI075985, K24 AI069994), the UCSF/Gladstone Center for AIDS
Research (P30 AI27763, P30 MH59037), the Center for AIDS Prevention
Studies (P30 MH62246), and the UCSF Clinical and Translational Science
Institute(UL1 RR024131-01). The development of the PhenoSense® Integrase
assay was partially supported by NIH NIAID SBIR- R43 AI057074-01.



## Footnotes

This study was presented in part at the Drug Resistance Workshop, June
2008, Sitges, Spain (abstract 10); and at the 16th Conference on
Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections, February 2009, Montreal,
Canada (abstract 621).

***Contributions of authors.*** HH: Study design, statistical analysis,
authorship of manuscript. HL, RH, JL: subject recruitment. SF, SG, WH,
CP: genotype, phenotype data. JNM, DB, SGD: study design, statistical
analysis.

***Potential conflicts of interest*** . SG, SF, WH, and CP are employees
of Monogram Biosciences. HH has received research support from Merck and
Monogram Biosciences. SD has received research support from Merck,
Gilead, and Monogram Biosciences.

