# CRF07_BC Strain Dominates the HIV-1 Epidemic in Injection Drug Users in Liangshan Prefecture of Sichuan, China

## Abstract

The Liangshan prefecture in Sichuan province is an area in China
severely affected by the HIV epidemic, with intravenous drug use (IDU)
as the main risk factor. No reports on HIV subtypes prevalent in IDUs in
Liangshan prefecture could be found. In this study, we have
characterized the genotypes of HIV-1 in the IDU population in Liangshan
prefecture and further determined the phylogenetic relationship of the
CRF07_BC strains to HIV-1 sequences from the other regions of China,
including Xinjiang and Yunnan provinces, to explore the pattern and
possible diffusion pathway of HIV-1 in these regions. HIV-1-seropositive
drug-naive IDUs identified in Liangshan prefecture, Sichuan province
were enrolled in 2009. Full-length *gag* and *pol* genes were amplified
by reverse transcription and nested PCR and then sequenced. All of the
sequences were subtyped. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the
neighbor-joining and maximum likelihood methods. Divergence times were
estimated using a Bayesian molecular clock approach. CRF07_BC was found
to be the predominant strain in IDUs in Liangshan prefecture (95.5%).
The CRF07_BC strains from Liangshan prefecture were found to be
intermixed with those from Yunnan province in phylogenetic trees. The
CRF07_BC sequences from Xinjiang province can be grouped into several
clusters, suggesting that the expansion of the CRF07_BC epidemic in
Xinjiang province was the result of a local epidemic driven by multiple
independent introductions in the late 1990s. Only low-level
drug-resistant viruses were found in the IDU population. CRF07_BC
strains from Liangshan prefecture were more similar to those from Yunnan
province than those from Xinjiang province. This finding will contribute
to our understanding of the distribution, the evolution, and the
potential source of CRF07_BC founder strains, and will also provide
useful information for the development of strategies to prevent
transmission.



## Materials and Methods

### Study subjects and specimens

HIV-positive drug-naive individuals were randomly recruited from the
local HIV/AIDS sentinel surveillance sites in Liangshan prefecture with
informed consents. The CD4 ^+^ T cells counts were determined using flow
cytometry and reagents provided by Becton Dickinson Biosciences (San
Jose, CA) with fresh whole blood specimens before the plasma was
separated; the plasma was then stored at −80°C; until use. The Ethical
Review Board, Science and Technology Supervisory Committee at the
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology approved the study.

### HIV-1 RNA extraction, amplification, and sequencing

Viral RNA was extracted from 500 μl of HIV-1-positive plasma specimens
using a high pure viral RNA kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Viral
full-length *gag* and *pol* genes were amplified separately after
reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as
described previously. ^26^ Positive PCR products were sequenced by the
Beijing Liuhe Huada gene technology company (BGI, Beijing, China) with a
variety of internal specific primers (available on request) after
purification.

### Genotyping and phylogenetic analysis of HIV-1 sequences

The sequenced fragments were edited and assembled as described. ^27^ To
check for potential contamination, the sequences obtained were compared
to all known sequences in the HIV sequence database and all previous
sequences identified in our laboratory using the Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) search ( http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi ).
Sequences with 100% identity were considered to be contaminated. The HIV
genotype was determined using the national center for biotechnology
information viral genotyping tool (
www.ncbi.nih.gov/projects/genotyping/formpage.cgi ).

This was carried out by combining both gene fragments from the same
isolate and then further confirmed by phylogenetic analysis with
reference sequences using the neighbor-joining method in MEGA 5.0 ^28^
and the maximum likelihood method in PhyML3.0. ^29^ For maximum
likelihood analysis, the nucleotide substitution model was first
selected with jModelTest software, ^29\ ,\ 30^ SPR was used for tree
searching, and the reliability of topologies was estimated by performing
bootstrap analysis with 104 replicates. The possible intersubtype
mosaicism was screened with the online Recombination Identification
Program (version 3.0; http://hiv-web.lanl.gov ) and further confirmed by
the online software jpHMM-HIV ( http://jphmm.gobics.de/ ).

### Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) evolutionary analysis

MCMC analysis was fulfilled step by step as described. ^31^ First, all
of recombinant sequences detected by using RDP software were removed.
Second, the dataset was balanced to maximize the "clock-likeness" of the
data. To do this, a similar number of sequences from each time point and
as many time points as possible were selected. Samples from the most
overrepresented time points (2009 year) were randomly removed. Third,
Path-O-Gen software was used to test the existence of an actual
molecular clock signal by observing the regression between root-to-tip
divergence and sampling data. Fourth, the nucleotide substitution model
was selected by using jModelTest software. Fifth, the best demographic
model was selected using Bayes Factors criteria. Sixth, phylogenies were
inferred using BEAST v.1.7.5 with models selected above and other
default parameters. Simulations were run until convergence (i.e., an
effective sample size greater than 200 for all parameters). The first
10% of the output was used as a burn-in. The results were summarized
using Tracer v.1.5. Maximum clade credibility (MCC) trees were
summarized using TreeAnnotator v.1.6.2, and the final trees were edited
using Figtree v.1.3.1. ^32^

### Drug resistance analysis

Drug resistance mutations (DRMs) profiles and antiretroviral
susceptibility were determined using the World Health Organization 2009
list of mutations for surveillance of TDR as implemented in the
Calibrated Population Resistance tool (v.5.0 beta) ^33\ ,\ 34^ (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu ).

Go to:


## Results

### Characteristics of participants for the study

A total of 502 participants residing in Liangshan prefecture ( Fig. 1 )
who were confirmed as having HIV in 2007 and 2008 were enrolled in the
study in 2009 ( Table 1 ). Most (97.4%) were infected through
intravenous drug use. The average age of the participants was 31.1 years
old (ranging from 3 to 62 years). The Yi ethnic minority is the main
ethnicity in our study population. The CD4 T cell counts varied widely,
ranging from 22 to 1,446 cells/μl. Among the 502 participants, 489
subjects were infected by HIV through IDU and were subjected to further
detailed analysis.

**FIG. 1.**

Geographic location of Liangshan prefecture in China and area
information of reference sequences. Map of China highlighting Liangshan
prefecture, Sichuan province. Provinces containing reference sequences
for CRF07_BC phylogenetic analysis are labeled in color according to
that used in the maximum likelihood (ML) tree and maximum clade
credibility (MCC) tree. Color images available online at
www.liebertpub.com/aid


### Prevalence of HIV-1 subtypes

From 489 participants, 392 full-length *gag* genes (80.2%) and 284
full-length *pol* genes (58.1%) were successfully obtained. Among them,
both *gag* and *pol* genes were identified from 280 samples (57.3%).
Based on their sequences, the subtype variants from 401 participants
(82.0%) were determined. The other samples failed to amplify either gene
fragment possibly due to low viral load and/or sequence variations at
the primer binding sites. A Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)
search showed no evidence of sample contamination. Analysis of sequences
showed that all the gene structures were normal with the proper open
reading frames.

According to the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
viral genotyping tool, 383 CRF07_BC (95.5%) strains, 12 CRF08_BC (3.0%)
strains, 3 CRF01_AE (0.7%) strains, and 3 subtype C (0.7%) strains were
identified from 401 positive samples. The subtype of each strain was
further confirmed by phylogenetic analysis using the reference sequences
representing subtypes A--D, F--H, J, K, CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC, and CRF08_BC
( www.hiv.lanl.gov ) ( Fig. 2 ). Our results thus suggest that CRF07_BC
is the dominant strain that is circulating in Liangshan prefecture.


Phylogenetic tree analysis. Neighbor-joining trees were created with the
full length *gag* **(a)** and *pol* **(b)** genes of HIV-1 sequences
from the intravenous drug use (IDU) population in Liangshan prefecture
and a selection of reference sequences of subtype A--D, F--H, J, K,
CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC, and CRF08_BC ( *black dots* , http://hiv-web.lanl.
gov/ ). The lengths of the *gag* and *pol* genes of HIV-1 sequences
obtained in the study were 1,503 and 3,056 base pairs using HXB2 as the
genomic calibrator. Each reference sequence is labeled with the HIV-1
subtype, followed by the sequence name. The bootstrap values supporting
the branch (more than 70%) are indicated at the corresponding nodes of
the tree. The scale bars representing genetic distances are listed
below.

### Phylogenetic relationship among CRF07_BC strains prevalent in Liangshan prefecture and in other areas in China

Investigation of the geographic relationship between Liangshan CRF07_BC
strains and those from other areas will be useful in determining the
temporal dynamics of the CRF07_BC strain. For this purpose, the *gag*
and *pol* gene fragments derived from same variant were first assembled
for phylogenetic analysis to obtain the strongest phylogenetic signal.
All CRF07_BC sequences covering the full-length *gag* and *pol* regions
were downloaded from the HIV sequence database, including six from
Xinjiang, one from Taiwan, five from Sichuan, three from Liaoning, one
from Hebei, one from Guangxi, and five with the areas of origin
uncertain. Considering that fewer sequences were obtained from other
areas as compared to Liangshan, 86 CRF07_BC sequences (12 from Beijing,
19 from Guangxi, 1 from Henan, and 54 from Yunnan) obtained from another
cohort in our laboratory were also added into the dataset. All sequences
were aligned together along with four subtype C references as the
outgroup. A maximum likelihood (ML) tree was constructed using the
GTR+I+G model of nucleotide substitution.

In the phylogenetic tree, two clusters containing 10 or more sequences
were identified; one is composed of sequences from Guangxi, Hebei,
Yunnan, and Liaoning provinces (Cluster I) and the other is composed of
sequences from Guangxi province (Cluster II), suggesting that HIV from
specific populations in different regions is clustered (Cluster I) while
others are unique for that region (Cluster II). Most sequences from
Liangshan prefecture were distributed evenly in the phylogenetic tree
and intermixed with those from Yunnan province, and only several small
clusters containing three to seven sequences were identified.

Xinjiang province is considered a key area for the phylogenetic study of
the CRF07_BC strain and has been proposed to be the source of the
strain. However, few sequences coving full-length *gag* and *pol*
segments can be found. To include CRF07_BC strains from Xinjiang
province into the phylogenetic analysis, a new dataset containing short
CRF07_BC sequences was constructed. For this purpose, all CRF07_BC
sequences with geographic information were downloaded from the HIV
sequence database ( www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/index ).

Sequences from different areas were separated and manually selected in
order to maximize the length and the number of segments analyzed. Based
on this criteria, 8 sequences from Beijing, 20 from Guangxi, 7 from
Hebei and Henan, 8 from Yunnan, 8 from Liaoning, 1 from Taiwan, and 290
from Xinjiang spanning 1,473 bp of the *gag* gene (from 817 to 2,289
according to the HXB2 calculator) were selected. The distribution of
Liangshan sequences in the ML tree was similar as shown in trees
constructed with full-length *gag--pol* sequences ( Fig. 3 ). Several
large clusters were identified containing sequences isolated in Xinjiang
province, suggesting that the CRF07_BC epidemic in Xinjiang province
might be a result of multiple introductions from Sichuan or Yunnan
province.

**FIG. 3.**

Evolutionary relationship between Liangshan HIV-1 CRF07_BC sequences
from the IDU population and those from other areas in China depicted on
a maximum likelihood tree of the full-length *gag* -- *pol* gene **(A)**
and partial *gag* gene **(B)** . **(A)** Full-length *gag* -- *pol*
sequences representing CRF07_BC from several areas were identified in
the laboratory or obtained from the database ( http://hiv-web.lanl. gov/
) and used for comparison with the sequences generated in this study.
Each reference sequence is labeled using the same color used in Fig. 1 .
The branch support values (more than 70%) are indicated at the
corresponding nodes of the tree. The subtree containing clusters is
illustrated at the right of the original tree. **(B)** The ML tree based
on partial CRF07_BC *gag* sequences representing CRF07_BC from several
areas is constructed to illustrate the evolutionary relationship between
strains from Liangshan prefecture and Xinjiang province. The subtree
containing clusters is illustrated accordingly. Color images available
online at www.liebertpub.com/aid

### Estimated timeline of the expansion of CRF07_BC in China

The final dataset for MCMC analysis was set up using 151 CRF07_BC
sequences selected from the phylogenetic analysis dataset containing the
1,473-bp length *gag* gene ( Fig. 4 ). The general time reversible (GTR)
nucleotide substitution model, strict clock model, and Bayesian skyline
demographic model were selected for MCMC analysis. In the MCC tree, nine
clusters were observed. Among of them, eight clusters (Clusters 2--9)
were composed of sequences from Xinjiang and the other one (Cluster 1)
was composed of sequences from four other provinces or cities (Beijing,
Hebei, Liaoning, and Guangxi). The tMRCAs of CRF07_BC were similar to
those in previous studies. ^16^ All of the Xinjiang clusters were
introduced into the area at the end of 1990s (between 1996 and 1999),
which is similar to the time that CRF07_BC was introduced into Taiwan.
^16^ Cluster V was founded in the early 2000s, which is later than the
other clusters.

**FIG. 4.**

Maximum clade credibility trees of the HIV-1 CRF07_BC sequences from
China based on the partial *gag* gene. All of the sequences are labeled
using the same colors used in Fig. 1 . The dates of MRCA and posterior
probability are labeled beside each node. Color images available online
at www.liebertpub.com/aid

### Drug-resistant analysis

The 284 full-length *pol* genes obtained in the study were screened on
line for the presence of transmitted drug-resistant mutations (see
Materials and Methods ). Because most of the drugs used for AIDS therapy
in China are still limited to reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTIs)
and protease inhibitors (PIs), the RTI and protease transmitted
drug-resistant mutations were analyzed separately. So far only 4 of the
284 strains under investigation showed major mutations (D67N, D103N,
G190A, and T215I separately), which is known to be associated with drug
resistance to RTIs ( Table 2 ). The overall prevalence of mutations
conferring resistance to RTIs was 1.4%.


To investigate protease-transmitted drug-resistant mutations, the amino
acid sequence of each strain was compared to the subtype B consensus
amino acid sequence using the published HIV drug resistance software
tools from the International Aids Society USA (IAS-USA) and only a
single major mutation (M46L) was seen in one sequence from our collected
viral sequences. The overall prevalence of mutations conferring
resistance to PIs was 0.35%.

Go to:


## Discussion

Sichuan province is one of the epicenters of the HIV/STI epidemic in
China. By 2008, there were 19,375 HIV infections reported in Sichuan
province, which ranked sixth among all provinces/autonomous regions in
China. ^35^ IDU was the primary diffusion pathway of HIV in Sichuan
(75.6%). ^36^ Liangshan is the largest autonomous prefecture of the
ethnic minority, the Yi nationality in China, with 46.5% of the
population belonging to the Yi ethnic group. Among this group, cultural
traditions lead to more frequent casual sexual behavior. Thus,
heterosexual transmission from persons infected through IDU may become a
major HIV transmission risk for the general population in the Liangshan
prefecture. We believe this is the first large-scale molecular
epidemiological study to analyze the spread of HIV-1 in IDUs in
Liangshan prefecture, Sichuan province. CRF07_BC was shown to be the
dominant strain. The detailed sequence information of CRF07_BC strains
prevalent in Liangshan prefecture, Sichuan province will provide clues
for the analysis of CRF07_BC temporal dynamics in China.

IDU is one of the major risk factors for HIV infection, which has led to
approximately 5--10% of HIV infections worldwide. ^37^ In China, the
number of drug users has consistently increased in the past decade. In
1997, the number of registered drug users was 70,000. In 2005, the
number has increased to 1.16 million. However, the actual number could
be as high as 3.5 million. Furthermore, the prevalence of HIV infection
among drug users had also increased from 35% in 1995 to 49% in 2004.
Among the 780,000 people living with HIV/AIDS in China, 16.9% were
infected through IDU (2011). ^38^ Although the ratio is currently not as
high as for sexually transmitted individuals, most of the IDUs in China
also engaged in high-risk sexual behaviors that led to a rapid spread of
HIV between IDUs and other populations. ^39^ Between 34% and 72% of the
female IDUs in China were reported to have commercial sex partners and
31.8% have nonregular sex partners; both groups had inconsistent condom
usage. ^40--42^

Several studies reported that many IDUs were also MSM in China
^43\ ,\ 44^ and to obtain drugs, some IDUs were also likely to trade sex
for money, ^45^ which facilitated HIV-1 transmission from IDUs to other
populations via heterosexual or MSM transmission (from male IDUs to
MSM). ^46^ A number of international reports have pointed out that the
overlap between injecting drug use behaviors and sexual risk behaviors
is the main driving force of the HIV epidemic in China. ^47\ ,\ 48^
Thus, surveillance of the HIV epidemic in IDUs would be helpful for
predicting the spread of the HIV epidemic in the general population.

There is still controversy about the hypothesis concerning the temporal
dynamics of CRF07_BC in Asia. In this study, CRF07_BC strains from
Liangshan prefecture and Yunnan province dispersed among all CRF07_BC
strains in the phylogenetic tree; these are different from Xinjiang
strains. Xinjiang CRF07_BC sequences were grouped into several clusters
with a large genetic distance from other sequences and high bootstrap
values. This suggests that multiple introductions of CRF07_BC strains
into Xinjiang province occurred. The MCMC analysis further proved the
results and demonstrated that most of the introductions happened at the
end of the 1990s. Our data refuted the contention that CRF07_BC was
first introduced into Xinjiang province and supported the contention
that it was introduced into Yunnan and Sichuan provinces before being
introduced into Xinjiang province. More sequences from Gansu, Ningxi,
and Shanxi provinces, which are between Sichuan and Xinjiang provinces,
will be helpful in absolutely demonstrating the temporal and geographic
migration of CRF07_BC in China.

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has been widely employed in
China since the start of the "Four Free and One Care" policy in 2003.
With the widespread use of HAART, HIV-1 drug resistance has become an
issue in some areas of China. For example, in 2005, a high ratio of HIV
drug-resistant mutations (20.8%) was reported in patients ( *n* =124)
treated with ART in Henan province, central China. ^49^ In the IDU
population, the data from the Chinese National (HIVDR) Surveillance and
Monitoring Network showed that 20.8% of individuals undertaking first
line drugs experienced virological failure. ^50^ Here we found that a
low level of drug-resistant strains was found in Liangshan, suggesting
that the ART program in Liangshan is functioning well.

According to the WHO HIVDR Threshold Surveillance protocol, our study
population was below the threshold of 5%, suggesting that there are
well-functioning ART programs in Liangshan prefecture and the
transmission of RTI and protease mutant viruses is still minimal.
However, with the recent scale up of free HAART in Liangshan and the
spread of HIV among different high-risk populations, drug resistance
surveillance will still be needed in the region.

In summary, we have carried out a comprehensive survey and genetic
characterization of the HIV strains that are prevalent in the IDU
population in Liangshan prefecture, which we believe is the most
complete analysis to date. We found that CRF07_BC is still highly
dominant in the IDU population, even 20 years after its initial
identification in the first outbreak in China. High genetic diversity
was found when compared to strains prevalent in other areas. A close
relationship was identified between these strains and those from Yunnan
province, and relatively low levels of drug-resistant mutations were
found. Phylogenetic analysis showed that CRF07_BC strains should be
introduced into Xinjiang province following drug traffic from Yunnan
province, through Liangshan prefecture of Sichuan, Gansu, and Qinghai
provinces. The detailed CRF07_BC sequence information will provide basic
information for designing intervention strategies and for HIV vaccine
design.

Go to:


## Sequence Data

The gene sequences were deposited in GenBank with the following
accession number:
KJ820145-KJ820408 ,
KP234525-KP234916 , and
KP234917-KP235200 .
