Pretreatment HIV Drug Resistance and HIV-1 Subtype C Are Independently
Associated With Virologic Failure: Results From the Multinational PEARLS
(ACTG A5175) Clinical Trial - PMC

Back to Top

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here\'s how you know

Log in

Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation

**Preview improvements coming to the PMC website in October 2024. Learn
More or Try it out now .**

Search PMC Full-Text Archive

Search in PMC

-   Advanced Search
-   User Guide

-

::: {role="main"}
-   Journal List
-   Clin Infect Dis
-   PMC4425827

As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in
an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the
contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.\
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer \| PMC Copyright Notice

Clin Infect Dis. 2015 May 15; 60(10): 1541--1549.

Published online 2015 Feb 13. doi: 10.1093/cid/civ102

PMCID: PMC4425827

PMID: 25681380


# Pretreatment HIV Drug Resistance and HIV-1 Subtype C Are Independently Associated With Virologic Failure: Results From the Multinational PEARLS (ACTG A5175) Clinical Trial

Rami Kantor , ^1^ Laura Smeaton , ^2^ Saran Vardhanabhuti , ^2^ Sarah E.
Hudelson , ^3^ Carol L. Wallis , ^4^ Srikanth Tripathy , ^5^ Mariza G.
Morgado , ^6^ Shanmugham Saravanan , ^7^ Pachamuthu Balakrishnan , ^7^
Marissa Reitsma , ^1^ Stephen Hart , ^8^ John W. Mellors , ^9^ Elias
Halvas , ^9^ Beatriz Grinsztejn , ^10^ Mina C. Hosseinipour , ^11^
Johnstone Kumwenda , ^12^ Alberto La Rosa , ^13^ Umesh G. Lalloo , ^14^
Javier R. Lama , ^13^ Mohammed Rassool , ^15^ Breno R. Santos , ^16^
Khuanchai Supparatpinyo , ^17^ James Hakim , ^18^ Timothy Flanigan , ^1^
Nagalingeswaran Kumarasamy , ^6^ Thomas B. Campbell , ^19^ and Susan H.
Eshleman ^3^ , for the AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) A5175 Study
Team

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer

See \" Editorial Commentary: Clinical Significance of HIV Subtype
Variability in Regard to Treatment Outcome. \" on page 1550.


##

**(See the Editorial Commentary by Wainberg on pages 1550--1.)**

Resource-limited settings disproportionately bear the global burden of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) \[ 1 \]. The development and
transmission of antiretroviral (ARV) drug resistance are major hurdles
to HIV care \[ 2 \]. As ARV therapy (ART) becomes more accessible in
resource-limited settings \[ 3 \], it is essential to investigate ARV
drug resistance in diverse HIV type 1 (HIV-1) subtypes and settings to
guide clinical care \[ 4 -- 6 \].

In resource-rich settings, resistance prior to ART is associated with a
shorter time to and higher rate of treatment failure \[ 7 , 8 \]. In
such settings, baseline resistance testing is recommended and cost
effective. In resource-limited settings, the World Health Organization
(WHO) recommends surveillance of baseline resistance only on a
population level to guide programmatic strategies \[ 9 \]. With
escalating ART rollout, a significant increase in ARV drug resistance is
expected over time. Recent reports show moderate rates of ARV drug
resistance (5%--15%) \[ 10 \] that are at least partly related to
limited monitoring of patients receiving ART, late identification of ART
failure, and accumulation of resistance that can be transmitted \[ 11 ,
12 \]. Further increases in transmitted and acquired HIV drug resistance
could compromise use of ARV drugs for HIV treatment and prevention \[ 3
\].

Global data on the effect of HIV drug resistance on virologic response
to first-line ART, particularly in persons infected with HIV-1 non-B
subtypes, are limited \[ 13 , 14 \], and have not been reported from
clinical trials in adults. The Prospective Evaluation of Antiretrovirals
in Resource-Limited Settings (PEARLS) AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG)
study was a clinical trial of initial ART conducted between 2005 and
2010 in 9 countries spanning 4 continents; most participants were in
resource-limited settings \[ 15 \]. Here, we present results of
preplanned analyses from PEARLS of the association of pre-ART resistance
with treatment outcome.

Go to:


## Abstract

***Background.*** Evaluation of pretreatment HIV genotyping is needed
globally to guide treatment programs. We examined the association of
pretreatment (baseline) drug resistance and subtype with virologic
failure in a multinational, randomized clinical trial that evaluated 3
antiretroviral treatment (ART) regimens and included resource-limited
setting sites.

***Methods.*** *Pol* genotyping was performed in a nested case-cohort
study including 270 randomly sampled participants (subcohort), and 218
additional participants failing ART (case group). Failure was defined as
confirmed viral load (VL) \>1000 copies/mL. Cox proportional hazards
models estimated resistance--failure association.

***Results.*** In the representative subcohort (261/270 participants
with genotypes; 44% women; median age, 35 years; median CD4 cell count,
151 cells/µL; median VL, 5.0 log ~10~ copies/mL; 58% non-B subtypes),
baseline resistance occurred in 4.2%, evenly distributed among treatment
arms and subtypes. In the subcohort and case groups combined (466/488
participants with genotypes), used to examine the association between
resistance and treatment failure, baseline resistance occurred in 7.1%
(9.4% with failure, 4.3% without). Baseline resistance was significantly
associated with shorter time to virologic failure (hazard ratio \[HR\],
2.03; *P* = .035), and after adjusting for sex, treatment arm,
sex--treatment arm interaction, pretreatment CD4 cell count, baseline
VL, and subtype, was still independently associated (HR, 2.1; *P* =
.05). Compared with subtype B, subtype C infection was associated with
higher failure risk (HR, 1.57; 95% confidence interval \[CI\],
1.04--2.35), whereas non-B/C subtype infection was associated with
longer time to failure (HR, 0.47; 95% CI, .22--.98).

***Conclusions.*** In this global clinical trial, pretreatment
resistance and HIV-1 subtype were independently associated with
virologic failure. Pretreatment genotyping should be considered whenever
feasible.

***Clinical Trials Registration.***
{\"type\":\"clinical-trial\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"NCT00084136\",\"term_id\":\"NCT00084136\"}}
NCT00084136 .

**Keywords:** HIV, drug resistance, subtype, clinical trial


## METHODS

### Participants and Study Design

PEARLS (ClinicalTrials.gov
{\"type\":\"clinical-trial\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"NCT00084136\",\"term_id\":\"NCT00084136\"}}
NCT00084136 ) was a multinational, phase 4, randomized, open-label
clinical trial, conducted in Brazil, Haiti, India, Malawi, Peru, South
Africa, Thailand, the United States, and Zimbabwe \[ 15 \]. Major
enrollment criteria included age \>18 years, HIV infection, CD4 count
\<300 cells/µL, and ART naive by self-report and medical records review
(\<7 days of cumulative drug exposure prior to enrollment). Single-dose
nevirapine (sdNVP) or zidovudine (ZDV) for prevention of mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT) was allowed. During 2005--2007, 1571 eligible
participants were enrolled and randomly assigned to 1 of 3 treatment
arms: arm A: efavirenz (EFV) + coformulated ZDV-lamivudine (3TC), n =
519; arm B: atazanavir (ATV) + didanosine (ddI) + emtricitabine (FTC), n
= 526; arm C: EFV + coformulated FTC--tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
(TDF), n = 526. For management of ARV toxicity, the study provided the
following drugs as substitutes for randomized therapy: stavudine or TDF
for ZDV, ddI for TDF, and NVP for EFV. Follow-up was completed in May
2010.

Personnel at all sites received standardized training in adherence
counseling and adherence assessment prior to study initiation. Trained
site personnel provided adherence counseling at study entry and as
needed thereafter using a checklist that included covered information
about adherence, motivational training, and adherence skills (eg,
scheduling and techniques for remembering). Adherence counseling was
provided to participants with virologic failure, but the protocol did
not specify that the adherence counseling occur between the 2 viral load
(VL) measurements \[ 15 \]. Adherence data at each visit were collected
via self-report using a standardized questionnaire administered in local
languages (ACTG QOL0061, adapted from Chesney et al \[ 16 \]). Adherence
data over the first 12 weeks of study follow-up (ie, prior to initial
measurement of virologic failure at week 16) were summarized into a
dichotomous indicator variable representing either no problems or
any/some adherence problems.

Low prevalence of baseline resistance was assumed. Therefore, genotyping
was not performed for the entire study population (n = 1571). Instead, a
nested case-cohort study design (Figure ​ (Figure1) 1 ) was employed to
address the study objectives in a large cohort where the outcome (ie,
viral failure) was relatively rare. Baseline samples were obtained from
2 groups: (1) subcohort group: a subset of 270 participants randomly
selected from the total study population (stratified by treatment arm
and country to provide similar estimation precision). This group was
included in the estimation of baseline resistance and its correlates for
the entire study cohort; and (2) case group: 218 participants not
included in the subcohort group who experienced virologic failure. The
case group was only included in the assessment of associations between
baseline resistance and virologic failure. For this analysis, the case
group was combined with the subcohort group to form the full case cohort
sample (488 participants, 466 who had genotyping results). Covariate
information (including baseline genotype) was collected from the full
case cohort. Because the subcohort group was a random sample chosen
prospectively without regard for virologic failure, the sampling design
simultaneously provided unbiased estimates of baseline resistance.

Figure 1.

A flow diagram of eligible participants included in the case-cohort
analysis. The 270 participants in the subcohort group are a
representative random sample of the 1571 participants enrolled in the
Prospective Evaluation of Antiretrovirals in Resource-Limited Settings
(PEARLS) study. The 218 participants in the case group are participants
who are not part of the subcohort group, who experienced virologic
failure. Abbreviation: ART, antiretroviral treatment.

### Laboratory Methods

VL and CD4 cell count were measured at enrollment and every 8 weeks
throughout the study, as previously described \[ 15 \]. Plasma samples
were stored for genotyping. *Pol* genotyping was performed
retrospectively at 4 regional laboratories that participated in the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Division
of AIDS Virology Quality Assurance program \[ 17 \] using the ViroSeq
HIV-1 Genotyping System (Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, California). The
HIV Prevention Trials Network (HPTN) Laboratory Center coordinated the
genotyping.

### Sequence Analysis

Resistance mutations were assessed using the 2009 WHO mutation list \[
18 \]. HIV-1 subtypes were determined by phylogenetic analysis, using
PHYLIP DNADIST and neighbor-joining programs \[ 19 \], with reference
sequences from the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) Database \[ 20
\]. Based on the resulting output matrix of genetic distance
coefficients, the subtype of the closest reference sequence was taken as
the probable subtype. Sequences with ambiguous subtype calls were
reviewed and manually classified by the LANL recombinant identification
program \[ 20 \]. Sequence quality control was performed with SQUAT \[
21 \].

### Statistical Methods

The association of baseline resistance with other baseline
characteristics of participants was assessed in the subcohort group.
Characteristics included sex, race, age, pretreatment CD4 cell count and
VL, subtype, country, history of AIDS or tuberculosis, hepatitis B
serology, and prior ARV drug use for PMTCT. Fisher exact tests (for
categorical variables) or Wilcoxon rank-sum tests (for continuous
variables) tested association between characteristics and presence of
baseline resistance. Prevalence estimates used exact methods
(Clopper--Pearson) for confidence interval (CI) calculations.

Confirmed virologic failure was defined as having 2 consecutive VLs
\>1000 copies/mL ≥14 weeks after randomization. Association between
resistance and initial confirmed virologic failure was tested in the
full case cohort (Figure ​ (Figure1). 1 ). To handle the case-cohort
sampling design appropriately, a Cox proportional hazards model using
inverse probability weighting was fit to study data. Multivariable
models were built purposefully (ie, investigator request for covariate
inclusion), and testing whether resistance modified the treatment effect
for virologic failure used an interaction term and 2 degrees of freedom
Wald test.

The planned size of the subcohort group (n = 270) was based on the
following assumptions: (1) 5% prevalence of resistance in the full study
cohort; (2) virologic failure in 29% of the 1571 participants in the
full study cohort; and (3) type 1 error of 5%. Based on these
assumptions, the case-cohort design had 80% power to detect a hazard
ratio (HR) of 2.3 or higher for virologic failure between those with vs
those without resistance. Using the same assumed prevalence of
resistance, the estimated precision on prevalence of resistance within
any country (n = approximately 30 participants) was estimated to be
approximately 13 percentage points (or approximately 5 percentage points
across countries). All statistical analyses were performed using SAS
version 9.2 on the UNIX platform.

Go to:


## RESULTS

### Study Participants

Of 1571 participants, 488 (31%) were included in the full case cohort
(Figure ​ (Figure1). 1 ). Genotyping was successful for 261 of 270 (97%)
participants in the subcohort group (51 failed ART) and for 205 of 218
(94%) additional participants in the case group (all failed ART).
Baseline characteristics for participants with genotyping results in the
randomized subcohort group and full case cohort are shown in Table ​
Table1 1 .

### Table 1.

Baseline Demographics and Clinical Characteristics of Study Participants
With Genotyping Results

Variable

Random Subcohort (n = 261)

Full Case Cohort (N = 466)

Male sex

147 (56%)

259 (56%)

Race

Asian

57 (22%)

91 (20%)

Black or African American

133 (51%)

257 (55%)

White

38 (15%)

65 (14%)

Native American

0 (0%)

1 (0%)

Other

31 (12%)

50 (11%)

Unknown

2 (1%)

2 (0%)

Age, y, mean (range)

36 (18--65)

35 (18--65)

VL, log ~10~ copies/mL, mean (range)

5.0 (2.6--5.9)

5.0 (2.6--5.9)

CD4 count, cells/µL, mean (range)

151 (3--297)

151 (2--298)

Treatment arm

A (EFV+3TC+ZDV)

88 (34%)

150 (32%)

B (ATV+ddI+FTC)

86 (33%)

172 (37%)

C (EFV+FTC+TDF)

87 (33%)

144 (31%)

Geographic region

Africa

86 (33%)

179 (38%)

South America

59 (23%)

93 (20%)

Asia

56 (23%)

88 (19%)

United States

30 (11%)

66 (14%)

Caribbean

30 (11%)

40 (9%)

Subtype/CRF

C

119 (46%)

243 (52%)

B

109 (42%)

181 (39%)

CRF01_AE

24 (9%)

26 (6%)

F1

4 (2%)

5 (1%)

CRF02_AG

2 (1%)

3 (1%)

Other ^a^

3 (1%)

8 (2%)

Open in a separate window

Abbreviations: 3TC, lamivudine; ATV, atazanavir; CRF, circulating
recombinant form; ddI, didanosine; EFV, efavirenz; FTC, emtricitabine;
TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate; VL, viral load; ZDV, zidovudine.

^a^ Random subcohort: CRF12_BF (1), CRF31_BC (2); full case cohort: A1
(1), CRF12_BF (1), CRF15_01B (1), CRF31_BC (5).

### Baseline Resistance in the Subcohort Group and Case Group

In the subcohort group, at least 1 resistance mutation was identified in
11 of 261 (4.2%) participants (95% \[CI\], 2.1%--7.4%) (IDs 1--11, Table
​Table2); 2 ); 7 had nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI)
mutations, 2 had nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)
mutations, and 2 had protease inhibitor (PI) mutations. Six of the 11
(55%) were infected with non-B subtypes; none of the 11 reported prior
ART. The prevalence of resistance did not significantly vary by country
(Table ​ (Table3). 3 ). None of the baseline characteristics examined
(listed in Table ​ Table1) 1 ) were significantly associated with
resistance, overall or by ARV drug class. There was no significant
association with resistance and early self-reported adherence to ART.

### Table 2.

Baseline Drug Resistance Mutations According to Treatment Arm, Country,
and Subtype

ID

Treatment Arm

Country

Subtype

NRTI

NNRTI

PI

Subcohort group

1

A (EFV+3TC+ZDV)

India

C

L100IL

2

Thailand

AE

D67N, K219Q

3

US

B

M46LM

4

US

B

M41LM

5

B (ATV+ddI+FTC)

Haiti

B

M184I

6 ^a^

Malawi

C

I85IV

7 ^a^

Malawi

C

K103N

8

South Africa

C

T69ADNT

9

C (EFV+FTC+TDF)

Peru

B

M41L, L210W, T215D

10

Thailand

AE

T215S

11

US

B

T215S

Case group

12

A (EFV+3TC+ZDV)

Malawi

C

M184V, T215NSTY

K103N, 181C

13

Malawi

C

K103KN

14

South Africa

C

K103KN

15 ^b^

South Africa

C

K103KN

16

B (ATV+ddI+FTC)

Brazil

B

K103N

17

Haiti

B

K103KN

18

India

C

M184V

K101EK, Y188CY, G190S

19

Malawi

C

M184V

V106AV

20 ^b^

Malawi

C

M184V

Y181C

21

Malawi

C

M184V

K103N

22

US

B

K103KN

23

C (EFV+FTC+TDF)

Brazil

B

K103KN

24

Brazil

F1

K103KN

25

Haiti

B

T215FIST

Y188L

26

Malawi

C

M184V

K101E, G190A

27

Malawi

C

K65R, Y115FY, M184V

K103N, V106M

28 ^b^

Peru

B

K103RS

29 ^b^

South Africa

C

K101E

30

Thailand

AE

K103N, G190AG

31

US

B

K65R

L100I

32

US

B

Y188L

33

US

B

K103N

Open in a separate window

Subcohort group: ID 1--11; case group: ID 12--33. The identification
numbers of participants who failed at the earliest available time point
(16 weeks) are underlined.

Participants with mutations not associated with initial regimens: ID 7,
switched to ZDV+3TC+EFV after 79 weeks on the study regimen and failed
95 weeks after the regimen switch; ID 17, switched to ddI+FTC+EFV after
19 weeks on the study regimen and failed 5 weeks after that regimen
switch; ID 22, switched to ddI+FTC+EFV after 16 weeks on the study
regimen and failed 3 weeks after the regimen switch; ID 16, remained on
study drug and failed treatment after 16 weeks.

The following participants received antiretroviral drugs for prevention
of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV prior to enrollment: ID
15, received single-dose nevirapine (sdNVP) 16 weeks before enrollment;
ID 20, received sdNVP 11 weeks before enrollment; ID 28, received ZDV
monotherapy 65--70 weeks before enrollment; ID 29, received sdNVP 29
weeks before enrollment.

Abbreviations: 3TC, lamivudine; ATV, atazanavir; ddI, didanosine; EFV,
efavirenz; FTC, emtricitabine; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; ID,
participant number; NNRTI, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor; NRTI, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; PI,
protease inhibitor; TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate; ZDV, zidovudine.

^a^ Participants in the subcohort group who subsequently failed
treatment.

^b^ Participants with prior exposure to antiretrovirals for PMTCT (see
text in footnote above for details).

### Table 3.

Estimated Prevalence of Baseline Resistance in the Subcohort

No.

Prevalence Estimate

95% CI for Prevalence

Overall

261

4.2%

(2.1%--7.4%)

Country

*P* = .7

Brazil

29

0%

NA

Haiti

30

3.3%

(0%--10.2%)

India

28

3.6%

(0%--10.9%)

Malawi

29

6.9%

(0%--16.7%)

Peru

30

3.3%

(0%--10.2%)

South Africa

29

3.5%

(0%--10.5%)

Thailand

28

7.1%

(0%--17.3%)

United States

30

10.0%

(0%--21.4%)

Zimbabwe

28

0%

NA

Subtype

*P* = .7

B

109

4.6%

(.6%--8.6%)

C

119

3.4%

(.1%--6.7%)

Non-B, non-C

33

6.1%

(0%--14.7%)

Open in a separate window

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; NA, not applicable.

In the case group, at least 1 resistance mutation was identified in 22
of 205 (11%) participants (IDs 12--33, Table ​ Table2). 2 ). All 22
participants had ≥1 NNRTI mutation, 9 (41%) had ≥1 NRTI mutation, and 9
(4.4%) had dual-class resistance. Four of the 22 participants reported
having received ARV drugs for PMTCT.

### Association of Baseline Resistance and Virologic Failure

Virologic failure outcomes by resistance, subtype, and treatment arm
were evaluated using the full case cohort (N = 466; Table ​ Table4). 4 ).
At least 1 resistance mutation was detected in 24 of 256 (9.4%) samples
from participants with virologic failure and 9 of 210 (4.3%) samples
from participants without virologic failure. Among the 24 participants
with resistance who failed ART, 23 (96%) had NNRTI resistance, 9 (38%)
had NRTI resistance, and 1 (4%) had PI resistance. Furthermore, 83%
(20/24) of participants with resistance who failed ART had mutations
associated with drugs in their initial ART regimen. The 4 participants
who did not (IDs 7, 16, 17, and 22) were in treatment arm B and had the
baseline EFV-associated mutation, K103N. Three of these 4 participants
changed to an EFV-containing regimen prior to ART failure.

### Table 4.

Virologic Failure Outcomes by Baseline Resistance, Subtype, and
Treatment Arm

Outcome

Subcohort Group

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Case Group

Total

No VL Failure

VL Failure

VL Failure

Full case cohort

No resistance

201

49

183

433

Any resistance

9

2

22

33

Total

210

51

205

466

Model, resistance only: HR, 2.03 \[95% CI, 1.05--3.92\]

Subtype

Subtype B

All

88

21

72

181

No resistance

83

21

63

167

Any resistance

5

0

9

14

Subtype C

All

92

27

124

243

No resistance

90

25

113

228

Any resistance

2

2

11

15

Other subtypes

All

30

3

9

42

No resistance

28

3

7

38

Any resistance

2

0

2

4

Model, resistance controlling for subtype: HR, 2.16 \[95% CI,
1.11--4.23\]

Treatment arm

Arm A: EFV+3TC+ZDV

All

72

16

62

150

No resistance

68

16

58

142

Any resistance

4

0

4

8

Arm B: ATV+ddI+FTC

All

67

19

86

172

No resistance

65

17

79

161

Any resistance

2

2

7

11

Arm C: EFV+FTC+TDF

All

71

16

57

144

No resistance

68

16

46

130

Any resistance

3

0

11

14

Model, resistance controlling for treatment arm: HR, 2.01 \[95% CI,
1.04--3.88\]

Open in a separate window

Abbreviations: 3TC, lamivudine; ATV, atazanavir; CI, confidence
interval; ddI, didanosine; EFV, efavirenz; FTC, emtricitabine; HR,
hazard ratio; TDF, tenofovir disproxil fumarate; VL, viral load; ZDV,
zidovudine.

Eighty-five of the 256 (33%) participants who failed ART experienced ART
failure at the earliest time (week 16 study visit). Eleven of these 85
(13%) had baseline resistance (Table ​ (Table2). 2 ). Median time to
virologic failure among those 256 who failed was 32 weeks (75th
percentile: 68 weeks) and the median time to confirmation of ART failure
was 4 weeks (interquartile range \[IQR\], 2--7 weeks). Among 232
participants without baseline resistance, median VL at failure was 4.2
log ~10~ copies/mL (IQR, 3.6--5.0 log ~10~ copies/mL). Among 24
participants with resistance, the median VL at failure was 4.2 log ~10~
copies/mL (IQR, 3.4--4.7 log ~10~ copies/mL). VL at initial or
confirmatory time points was not significantly associated with
resistance or treatment arm.

Among 256 participants who failed ART, median CD4 count at failure was
241 cells/µL (IQR, 167--359 cells/µL), and median change from
pretreatment CD4 cell count was 98 cells/µL (IQR, 24--181 cells/µL).
Among 232 participants without resistance who failed ART, these values
were 242 cells/µL (IQR, 171--368 cells/µL) and 102 cells/µL (IQR,
26--189 cells/µL), respectively. Among 24 participants with resistance,
these values were 211 cells/µL (IQR, 145--248 cells/µL) and 69 cells/µL
(IQR, 13--121 cells/µL), respectively. The distribution of changes in
CD4 cell count from pretreatment to virologic failure was not
significantly associated with resistance ( *P* = .08).

In a univariable weighted Cox proportional hazards model, baseline
resistance was significantly associated with virologic failure and
shorter time to virologic failure (HR, 2.03 \[95% CI, 1.05--3.92; *P* =
.035\]). After adjusting for sex, treatment arm, sex--treatment arm
interaction, pretreatment CD4 cell count, baseline VL, and subtype,
significance remained (HR, 2.1 \[95% CI, 1.0--4.6\]; *P* = .05). In the
same multivariable model, subtype was independently associated with
virologic failure ( *P* = .001). Compared to subtype B, non--subtype
C/non--subtype B infection was protective against failure (HR, 0.39
\[95% CI, .19--.81\]), whereas there was a nonsignificant trend toward
an association between subtype C infection and increased risk of failure
(HR, 1.4 \[95% CI, .98--2.1\]).

In a multivariable model, additionally adjusting for CD4 cell count
change and self-report of nonadherence within the first 12 weeks,
baseline resistance remained significantly associated with virologic
failure and time to failure (HR, 2.26 \[95% CI, 1.03--4.95\]). Subtype
was again independently associated with virologic failure and time to
virologic failure: subtype C infection was associated with shorter time
to failure (HR, 1.57 vs subtype B \[95% CI, 1.04--2.35\]), and infection
with other subtypes (non-B, non-C) was associated with longer time to
failure (HR, 0.47 vs subtype B \[95% CI, .22--.98\]). There was no
statistically significant evidence that the treatment effect for VL that
was originally observed in the study \[ 15 \]) was modified by baseline
resistance ( *P* = .4 for interaction).

Go to:


## DISCUSSION

This report presents results of preplanned analyses of baseline HIV drug
resistance in a randomized controlled clinical trial. Baseline
resistance was relatively uncommon (4.2%) but was significantly
associated with virologic failure and time to virologic failure. The
strict enrollment criteria, study oversight, and monitoring of the
PEARLS trial strengthen the conclusions of the study. Inclusion of
participants with equal sex distribution from geographically,
ethnically, racially, and economically diverse regions strengthens the
relevance of the findings to the global HIV epidemic.

The observed associations between resistance and ART failure in the
report are consistent with previous findings from both resource-limited
and resource-rich settings \[ 7 , 13 , 22 , 23 \], including a report by
Hamers et al that analyzed baseline resistance in sub-Saharan Africa \[
13 \]. That study and ours both reached similar conclusions, but some
differences between the studies should be noted. First, PEARLS was a
randomized, controlled trial, whereas the prior study was based on
analysis of a prospective cohort. Second, PEARLS was conducted on 4
continents; the prior study was conducted in Africa only. Third, we used
the WHO mutation list designed specifically for transmitted resistance
surveillance in multiple subtypes \[ 18 \], whereas the prior study used
the International AIDS Society--USA \[ 24 \] and Stanford \[ 25 \]
mutation lists. Fourth, PEARLS had stringent eligibility criteria
regarding previous ART exposure, which reduced the likelihood for
confounding by prior exposure. Finally, the longitudinal design of the
PEARLS trial, in which participants were monitored for virologic failure
in real time at 8-week intervals, allowed identification of the
association between baseline resistance and time to virologic failure,
which was not feasible in the prior study. Our findings thus
significantly expand and strengthen previously observed associations
between baseline resistance and ART outcomes in resource-limited
settings.

Interestingly, we did not observe a significant association between the
prevalence of baseline resistance and either HIV-1 subtype or country.
However, we did find that those infected with subtype C were more likely
to fail ART, and to fail earlier than those infected with subtype B.
Although HIV-1 subtype is not currently part of clinical care
considerations, some reports suggest that it might be associated with
disease progression and drug resistance development \[ 4 , 6 , 26 \],
whereas others disagree \[ 27 , 28 \]. Similar controversy exists
particularly for subtype C \[ 29 -- 31 \]. We present the first clinical
trial data to support the association of HIV-1 subtype, particularly the
globally predominant subtype C, with viral failure. Subtype C has been
associated with a unique NNRTI mutation, V106M \[ 32 \], increased
occurrence of the NRTI K65R mutation \[ 33 \], and overall higher NRTI
and NNRTI resistance prevalence \[ 34 \]. Differences in the types and
frequency of specific drug resistance mutations have been noted for
other HIV-1 subtypes as well \[ 35 , 36 \]. These differences likely
reflect subtype-based differences in the sequences of HIV protease,
reverse transcriptase, and other viral proteins targeted by ARV drugs.
These differences may impact treatment outcomes and the prevalence of
drug resistance in regions where different subtypes predominate. Ongoing
studies are analyzing resistance at failure in the PEARLS study; other
studies are planned to evaluate the frequency and impact of minority
resistance variants \[ 37 \]. Continued research on subtype-related
differences in treatment failure and drug resistance is warranted,
especially as subtype may be confounded with other factors that were not
controlled in this study. The genetic barrier to resistance varies among
ARV drugs. The impact of specific drug resistance mutations also varies.
Mutations such as K103N and M184V, which confer high-level drug
resistance and resistance to multiple drugs, have more significant
implications for treatment options and outcomes than mutations
associated with low-level resistance and/or resistance to single ARV
drugs.

Pre-ART genotyping is cost-effective in the United States where the
estimated prevalence of transmitted drug resistance is \>1% \[ 8 \], but
is not routine in most resource-limited settings. This primarily
reflects infrastructure and cost constraints, but also the lack of data
documenting utility and cost-effectiveness of pre-ART resistance
testing, particularly in settings with low prevalence of drug-resistant
HIV. The benefit of pre-ART resistance testing is expected to increase
in resource-limited settings as levels of resistance rise with ART
scale-up. It is important to note that this study was conducted in the
context of a clinical trial, with frequent VL monitoring, as well as
other adherence assessments and adherence counseling. It will also be
important to conduct similar analyses of baseline resistance and ART
outcome in nontrial (clinical) settings in resource-limited settings
where key components of HIV care, such as VL and CD4 cell count
monitoring, are not routine \[ 38 \].

One limitation of our study is that some participants may have had prior
exposure to ARV drugs and either did not know this or chose not to
disclose this information at time of enrollment. Thus, it is not
possible to conclude that all cases of baseline resistance were due to
transmitted drug resistance. Failure to disclose ARV drug use has been
documented in other studies, including a trial performed at some of the
same sites as PEARLS \[ 39 -- 41 \]. Another limitation of this study is
that pre-ART resistance may have been underestimated due to mutation
decay and reversion in study participants with long-standing HIV
infection \[ 42 \]. Genotyping was also performed using population
sequencing, which may not detect low-level HIV variants with drug
resistance mutations \[ 43 \]. Additionally, PEARLS baseline samples
were collected between 2005 and 2007, relatively early in the roll-out
of ART, which might have affected the prevalence of pretreatment drug
resistance. Last, because the frequency of baseline resistance was
relatively low in the subcohort, some analyses designed to identify
subpopulations that would be most likely to benefit from pre-ART
genotyping (eg, analyses of the association of baseline resistance with
subtype and geography) were limited due to the small absolute numbers of
persons with the outcome of baseline resistance.

In summary, this report demonstrates a significant negative impact of
baseline resistance on ART outcome in adults with diverse subtypes in
diverse settings. Although baseline resistance prevalence remains low in
many settings, continued surveillance is necessary, especially in
regions with programs or plans for enhanced ART scale-up. With expected
increases in the prevalence of transmitted resistance worldwide, this
study will help inform policy decisions related to the use of resistance
testing in clinical practice in resource-limited settings. The findings
in the report support use of genotyping prior to ART initiation in
resource-limited settings, when feasible.

Go to:


## Notes

***Acknowledgments.*** The authors thank the A5175 study team and
participants for providing samples and data for this work. The authors
also thank the laboratory staff at each of the participating
institutions for assistance with sample management and testing.

***Disclaimer.*** The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) or the
National Institutes of Health.

***Financial support.*** This work was supported by the Statistical and
Data Management Center of the ACTG, under the NIAID (grant number
UM1AI068634 ) and the Leadership grant (grant number UM1AI068636 ); and
the NIAID (grant numbers RO1AI066922 and P30AI042853 ; to R. K. and
UM1AI068613 to S. H. E.). The pharmaceutical sponsors for this study
included Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences,
and GlaxoSmithKline.

***Potential conflicts of interest.*** T. B. C. has served as a
consultant for Gilead Sciences. C. L. W. has served as a consultant for
Celera and has received honoraria from AbbVie and Merck. J. W. M. is a
consultant for Gilead Sciences and a shareholder of RFS Pharmaceuticals.
T. F. has stock ownership of pharmaceutical sponsors Boehringer
Ingelheim, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, and GlaxoSmithKline.
A. L. R. is a part-time employee at Janssen Peru. All other authors
report no potential conflicts.

All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.

Go to:


**Figure 1 not found**

**Figure1 not found**



## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Table 2

**Table 2 not found**

## Table 3

**Table 3 not found**

## Table 4

**Table 4 not found**

## Table1

**Table1 not found**

## Table2

**Table2 not found**

## Table3

**Table3 not found**

## Table4

**Table4 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Variable   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Random Subcohort (n = 261)   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Full Case Cohort (N = 466)   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Male sex  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   147 (56%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   259 (56%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" rowspan="1">   Race  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Asian  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   57 (22%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   91 (20%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Black or African American  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   133 (51%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   257 (55%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   White  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   38 (15%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   65 (14%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Native American  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0 (0%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   1 (0%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Other  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   31 (12%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   50 (11%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Unknown  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2 (1%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2 (0%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Age, y, mean (range)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   36 (18–65)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   35 (18–65)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   VL, log   <sub>    10   </sub>   copies/mL, mean (range)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   5.0 (2.6–5.9)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   5.0 (2.6–5.9)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   CD4 count, cells/µL, mean (range)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   151 (3–297)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   151 (2–298)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" rowspan="1">   Treatment arm  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A (EFV+3TC+ZDV)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   88 (34%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   150 (32%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B (ATV+ddI+FTC)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   86 (33%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   172 (37%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C (EFV+FTC+TDF)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   87 (33%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   144 (31%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" rowspan="1">   Geographic region  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Africa  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   86 (33%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   179 (38%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South America  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   59 (23%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   93 (20%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Asia  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   56 (23%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   88 (19%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   United States  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30 (11%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   66 (14%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Caribbean  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30 (11%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   40 (9%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3" rowspan="1">   Subtype/CRF  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   119 (46%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   243 (52%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   109 (42%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   181 (39%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   CRF01_AE  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   24 (9%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   26 (6%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   F1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4 (2%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   5 (1%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   CRF02_AG  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2 (1%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3 (1%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Other   <sup>    a   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3 (1%)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   8 (2%)  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    ID   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Treatment Arm   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Country   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Subtype   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    NRTI   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    NNRTI   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    PI   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="7" rowspan="1">   Subcohort group  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="4">   A (EFV+3TC+ZDV)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   India  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   L100IL  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Thailand  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   AE  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   D67N, K219Q  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M46LM  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M41LM  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   5  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="4">   B (ATV+ddI+FTC)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Haiti  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184I  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   6   <sup>    a   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   I85IV  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   7   <sup>    a   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   8  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South Africa  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   T69ADNT  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   9  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="3">   C (EFV+FTC+TDF)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Peru  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M41L, L210W, T215D  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   10  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Thailand  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   AE  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   T215S  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   11  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   T215S  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="7" rowspan="1">   Case group  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   12  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="4">   A (EFV+3TC+ZDV)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184V, T215NSTY  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N, 181C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   13  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   14  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South Africa  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   15   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South Africa  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   16  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="7">   B (ATV+ddI+FTC)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Brazil  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   17  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Haiti  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   18  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   India  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184V  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K101EK, Y188CY, G190S  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   19  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184V  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   V106AV  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   20   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184V  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Y181C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   21  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184V  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   22  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   23  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="11">   C (EFV+FTC+TDF)  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Brazil  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   24  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Brazil  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   F1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103KN  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   25  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Haiti  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   T215FIST  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Y188L  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   26  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M184V  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K101E, G190A  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   27  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K65R, Y115FY, M184V  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N, V106M  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   28   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Peru  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103RS  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   29   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South Africa  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K101E  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Thailand  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   AE  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N, G190AG  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   31  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K65R  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   L100I  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   32  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Y188L  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   33  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   US  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   K103N  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr></table>

## Any table 2

<table><thead><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="1"></th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    No.   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Prevalence Estimate   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    95% CI for Prevalence   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Overall  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   261  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4.2%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (2.1%–7.4%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Country  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   P   = .7  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Brazil  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   29  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   NA  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Haiti  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3.3%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–10.2%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   India  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   28  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3.6%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–10.9%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Malawi  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   29  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   6.9%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–16.7%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Peru  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3.3%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–10.2%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South Africa  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   29  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3.5%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–10.5%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Thailand  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   28  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   7.1%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–17.3%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   United States  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   10.0%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–21.4%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Zimbabwe  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   28  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   NA  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Subtype  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   P   = .7  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   109  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4.6%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (.6%–8.6%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   119  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3.4%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (.1%–6.7%)  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Non-B, non-C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   33  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   6.1%  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   (0%–14.7%)  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 3

<table><thead><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="2">    Outcome   </th><th colspan="2" rowspan="1">    Subcohort Group   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Case Group   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="2">    Total   </th></tr><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    No VL Failure   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    VL Failure   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    VL Failure   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Full case cohort  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   201  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   49  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   183  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   433  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   9  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   22  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   33  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Total  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   210  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   51  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   205  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   466  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Model, resistance only: HR, 2.03 [95% CI, 1.05–3.92]  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Subtype  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Subtype B  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   All  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   88  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   21  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   72  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   181  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   83  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   21  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   63  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   167  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   5  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   9  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   14  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Subtype C  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   All  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   92  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   27  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   124  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   243  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   90  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   25  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   113  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   228  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   11  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   15  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Other subtypes  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   All  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   30  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   9  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   42  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   28  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   7  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   38  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Model, resistance controlling for subtype: HR, 2.16 [95% CI, 1.11–4.23]  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Treatment arm  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Arm A: EFV+3TC+ZDV  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   All  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   72  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   16  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   62  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   150  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   68  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   16  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   58  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   142  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   4  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   8  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Arm B: ATV+ddI+FTC  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   All  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   67  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   19  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   86  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   172  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   65  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   17  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   79  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   161  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   7  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   11  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Arm C: EFV+FTC+TDF  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   All  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   71  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   16  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   57  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   144  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   68  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   16  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   46  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   130  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Any resistance  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   3  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   0  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   11  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   14  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5" rowspan="1">   Model, resistance controlling for treatment arm: HR, 2.01 [95% CI, 1.04–3.88]  </td></tr></table>



