# Identification of a new HIV-1 BC circulating recombinant form (CRF60_BC) in Italian young men having sex with men

## Abstract

HIV-1 recombination, reverse transcriptase (RT) low fidelity and high
replication rate are the drivers of variability and evolution on the
global scale. Only few of these HIV-1 chimeric forms have been
characterized in Europe, despite 20% of infections are due to unique or
circulating recombinant forms worldwide. An outbreak of BC recombinants
has been recently described in a southern region of Italy, Apulia, in
men having sex with men (MSM) seeking sexual partners on-line.

We analyzed the full length genome of HIV-1 BC recombinants harbored by
three recently infected subjects, two MSM and a heterosexual woman, with
no evidence of epidemiological link. The recombination analysis showed a
unique recombination pattern of a subtype C genome with 3 subtype B
fragments corresponding to HXB2 positions: \[1--463\] in the 5′LTR ,
\[2804--3037\] in RT and \[8662--9548\] corresponding to the C-terminal
segment of gp41, *nef* and most of 3′LTR.

Phylogenetic analysis revealed the South American origin of the C
subtype parental strain. A research conducted in an Italian nationwide
database provided six additional similar sequences from other Italian
regions with identical recombination pattern in *pol* gene; a further
BLAST search retrieved one full length genome isolated in France with
the same mosaic pattern, except an additional B subtype short fragment
in the integrase region. These recombinant isolates, designated
CRF60_BC, led to the identification of the first Italian circulating
recombinant form, which gave rise to an epidemic burst mainly involving
MSM.

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Patients

Three individuals were selected among HIV-1 recently-infected subjects.
They had no direct epidemiological link, based on the interview of their
recent exposure history. The estimated age of infection was calculated
by computing the fraction of ambiguous nucleotides in the protease-RT
population sequences, as previously reported ( Kouyos et al., 2011 ).
These patients belong to a cluster of 22 subjects carrying BC
recombinants, identified by means of sequence analysis of protease, RT,
and integrase regions of the *pol* gene for baseline screening of
transmitted drug resistance.

### 2.2. HIV-1 DNA extraction, amplification and sequencing

PBMCs were separated from whole blood by the Ficoll gradient protocol
and cell-associated DNA was extracted from stored samples of 3x10 ^6^
PBMCs with a QIAmp DNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Two
overlapping fragments (HXB2 positions 623--4687 and 4570--9632,
respectively) of HIV-1 genome were amplified from DNA by using a X-Long
PCR Kit (Roche, Inc, Indianapolis, USA): specific sets of primers, MSF12
(5′AAATCTCTAGCAGTGGCGCCCGAACAG3′) and CR1
(5′GATTCTACTACTCCTTGACTTTGGGGATTGTAGGGA3′) for fragment A, and JC4650
(5′GCAGGAAGATGGCCAGTAAAAGTAATACA3′) and MSR5
(5′GCACTCAAGGCAAGCTTTATTGAGGCT3′) for fragment B, were used ( Riva et
al., 2008 ). Cycling conditions were optimized following manufacturer
instructions. A third set of primers was used to perform a semi-nested
PCR to amplify the 5′ long terminal repeat (LTR) region (Forward outer
P1. 5′-GGGCTAATTTACTCCCAACAAAG-3′ HXB2 positions 6--28, Reverse outer P5
5′-CAGGGGGAAAGAAACATTAT-3′ HXB2 positions 858--877, Reverse nested P4
5′-AACAGGGACTTGAAAGCGAAAG-3′ HXB2 positions 645--666). In order to
exclude carry-over of individual patient DNA, experimental amplification
errors and to provide sufficient genomic material, each segment was
separately cloned into TOPO-XL cloning vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). Amplified clones and plasmid DNA were purified with a QIAquick PCR
purification kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and a PureYield™ Plasmid
Miniprep System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), respectively. Amplicons
were then subjected to sequencing reactions using Big Dye Terminator
(v3.1, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) labeled nucleotides in
an ABI PRISM 3130 XL Genetic Analyser sequencer (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA) following manufacturer's instructions; sets of
sequencing primers were used as previously described ( Riva et al., 2008
) or specifically designed, as needed to fill gaps to complete the
sequencing of both DNA strands.

### 2.3. Editing, genotyping and phylogenetic analysis of HIV-1 recombinants

BLAST tool (
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/BASIC_BLAST/basic_blast.html
) was used to retrieve sequences showing high similarity and the same BC
mosaic pattern within the Los Alamos HIV Sequence Database. An
additional survey for similar sequences in the Italian nationwide
database ARCA (Antiretroviral Resistance Cohort Analysis, (ARCA,
https://www.hivarca.net/
) was also conducted. A full length genome sequence was assembled by
overlapping amplicon sequences and merging them into one sequence by
means of Seqscape (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and
Geneious sofware (v. 6.0.5; http://www.geneious.com
) ( Kearse et al., 2012 ).

Final sequence data were trimmed to the same length and aligned to HXB2
reference using ClustalX/W (v2.1; \[ http://www.clustal.org/clustal2/
\]), and BioEdit (v7.1.11; \[
http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/bioedit/bioedit.html
\]) for minor manual adjustment (insertions and deletions involving more
than three nucleotides were removed). The alignment of a comprehensive
list of reference sequences (A--D, F--H, J and K) was retrieved from the
HIV database (www.hiv.lanl.gov). The monophyletic nature of the
full-length genome was evaluated by means of the MrBayes program using a
general-time reversible (GTR) model of nucleotide substitution, a
proportion of invariant sites, and gamma distributed rates among sites (
Huelsenbeck and Ronquist, 2001 ). ModelTest v. 3.6 ( Posada and
Crandall, 1998 ) was used to select the simplest evolutionary model that
adequately fitted the sequence data. A Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
search was made for 5 × 10 ^6^ generations using tree sampling every
100th generation and a burn-in fraction of 50%. Statistical support for
specific clades was obtained by calculating the posterior probability of
each monophyletic clade, and a posterior consensus tree was generated
after a 50% burn-in.

Similarity and bootscanning plots implemented in Simplot software v3.5.2
( http://sray.med.som.jhmi.edu/SCRoftware/simplot/
) were used to reconstruct recombination pattern. Given the total length
of HIV genome and the relatively short distance between breakpoints
observed in *pol* ( Monno et al., 2012 ), the analysis was run with a
window of 400 bp, moving in steps of 30 bp. The SplitsTree analysis was
also performed as an additional verification of results ( Koeppler and
Huson 2008 ). Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic trees were constructed for
individual segments identified within each breakpoint with bootstraping
on 1000 replicates using MEGA program (v5.05) ( Tamura et al., 2011 ).
Tree figures were rendered using FigTree (v1.4.0) (
http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/
). The MEGA program was used to evaluate the genetic distance between
and within subtypes on the full length genome.

### 2.4. Ethics Statement

The research did not require approval from the ethics committee,
according to the Italian law, since it was performed as an observational
study in the context of normal clinical routines (art.1, Low. decree
211/2003). However, all patients provided informed consent for the use
of their data for research purposes. Blood samples were taken as part of
standard patient care; DNA samples and data were previously anonymized,
according to the requirements set by Italian Data protection Code (Low
Decree 196/2003).

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Characteristics of patients

The demographic, immune-virological and clinical data of patients
subjected to HIV-1 full length analysis are shown in Table 1 . Patients
were young Italian individuals who seroconverted within a narrow time
frame. Behavioral and life-style information were collected by patient
interviews. None of the patients had a last negative antibody assay
before HIV-1 diagnosis that would allow dating their seroconversion.
However, the fraction of ambiguous nucleotides was \<0.5% for all of
them, thereby providing strong evidence of a recent infection
(\<1 year). Patient BAV514 self-reported high risk contacts with a male
in Rome six months before the diagnosis and his putative HIV-positive
source had repeated sexual intercourses with a foreign MSM. Patient
BAV499, also self-reported as MSM but was unable to date the supposed
infectious contact as he used to be highly promiscuous. Patient BAV636,
was a female who had a stable partner carrying the same BC recombinant
variant and denied any sexual intercourse with other men.

### 3.2. Identification of CRF60_BC as a new CRF

A MrBayes tree was constructed for HIV-1 full-length genomic sequences
of the putative CRF, including subtype references and available CRFs
with a BC pattern. Patient sequences clustered together with a posterior
probability of 1, independent of other clades and inside the C clade,
indicating the monophyletic nature of these HIV-1 strains and suggesting
that they may represent a novel CRF ( Fig. 1 ). This recombinant form
has been classified as CRF60_BC by the Los Alamos HIV sequence database.

A BLAST search identified two highest scoring sequences. One encompassed
the protease and RT region of *pol* gene, isolated from the plasma
sample of an Italian subject from Sicily (accession number: GU969560
), while the second belonged to a French individual whose viral genome,
obtained from PBMC-associated DNA, was characterized in full length
(accession number: EU448296
). Both isolates were harbored by MSM who were 18 and 39-years old. In
addition to the 22 BC recombinants in *pol* sequences previously
reported, a further search within the ARCA database highlighted 2 *pol*
sequences from Apulia that were sequenced in 2011 and added to the
database in 2013. Moreover, 2 and 1 patients from the Province of Modena
and Tuscany, respectively, were retrieved. All of these individuals were
young MSM with a recent diagnosis (2009--2011). Phylogenetic analysis of
these sequences confirmed their relation to the putative CRF as they
clustered together with a bootstrap value of 100%.

### 3.3. Analysis of CRF60_BC recombinant structure

Fig. 2 shows the schematic representation of subtype mosaicism of the
novel CRF.

The bootscan analysis indicated that all HIV-1 genomes showed the same
recombinant structure. Subtype C composed most of the genome except for
three fragments of a B subtype which covered a part of the 5′LTR (HXB-2
positions 0--462), a small region of RT *pol* gene (2804--3037) and the
last part of *env* gene. *Nef* gene and most of the 3′LTR (8662--9548)
were also subtype B. Fig. 2 highlights the detailed bootscan analysis.

The breakpoint pattern obtained from Simplot program was used as a guide
for the detailed examination of the recombinant sequences. The
full-length alignment was divided into 6 segments based on the bootscan
analysis (R1--R6). Fragments R1, R3 and R5 clustered with a high
bootstrap value together with subtype B references. In contrast,
segments R2, R4 and R6 clustered within the C clade ( Supplementary
Figs. 1--6 ).

Subtype C regions of the novel CRF60_BC were related to a South American
variant; in particular, these segments clustered with a Brazilian C
strain previously described (accession number: AF286228
). Subtype B fragments showed no similarity to any specific geographical
variants of this clade.

As the French BC recombinant with a high similarity to CRF60_BC showed
an unclassified region (positions 4261--4517, which include the
integrase region), identified as R4a, an additional tree was built to
compare this strain with the novel CRF, using the same reference
sequences ( Fig. 3 ). This analysis confirmed that the R4a segment of
CRF60_BC clustered with C subtype, while the French unclassified portion
belonged to B clade. An additional analysis, conducted for this portion
adding the 16 integrase regions of cluster patients, indicated that the
analyzed sequences belong to C clade (data not shown).

The Simplot analysis of the 6 *pol* sequences retrieved through BLAST
search and from the ARCA database showed the same recombination pattern
which was identical to that found for CRF60_BC (data not shown).

The intra-subtype distance among our sequences was 0.0343, comparable to
that detected among other CRFs or distinct subtypes. The *p distance*
between the CRF60_BC and the French isolate was comparable to that of
sequences belonging to the same subtype (0.044).

::: section

## 4. Discussion

Few CRFs have been described in Europe to date, even though several
non-B subtypes circulate together with the founder B clade and are
detected at increasing prevalence almost in all countries ( Tebit and
Arts, 2011 ). Most CRFs identified in Europe originated elsewhere,
mainly in Africa, and spread through immigration flows or tourism (
Hemelaar, 2012a ).

Differently, other recombinant forms have given rise to limited
epidemics both in frequency and regional dispersion, some of which have
involved only a few individuals (i.e. CRF05_DF and CRF47_BF) (
Fernández-García et al., 2010 ). Nevertheless, CRF03_AB, and CRF14_BG
have had a relevant impact on the HIV-1 epidemic, both in the countries
of first isolation and neighboring regions ( Liitsola et al., 1998 ,
Delgado and Thomson, 2002 ). For example, CRF14_BG which was originally
detected among intravenous drug users (IDUs) in Spain, has subsequently
spread among other risk groups and a recent phylogenic study has
demonstrated its Portuguese origin ( Bártolo et al., 2011 ).

Although part of the European CRFs demonstrate a complicated
recombination pattern with several breakpoints and involve various
parental subtypes, the B clade is the most often represented. As a
consequence of the B variant founder effect within IDUs in Europe, some
of these CRFs (CRF03_AB and CRF14_BG) principally segregate in this
specific risk population ( Hemelaar, 2012a ).

HIV-1 superinfection, which underlies the recombination events, has been
frequently reported in MSM due to the numerous risk contacts ( Redd et
al., 2013 ). Therefore, MSM are likely to represent a preferential group
which may give rise to HIV-1 recombinants. Nevertheless, no outbreak of
CRFs has been reported among these individuals at present. Herein, we
describe a new CRF which emerged in an epidemic event mainly involving
subjects with this risk factor. The characteristics of the individuals
involved in this outbreak demonstrated that they were young people
seeking sexual partners through homosexual Internet sites, acquired the
HIV-1 infection in the 2009--2011 period and were diagnosed soon after
seroconversion ( Monno et al., 2012 ).

Based on phylogenetic results, three hypotheses can be put forward
regarding the origin of CRF60_BC. The large co-circulation of B and C
subtypes in South America, where the existence of BC intersubtype
recombinants has been documented, the identification of the CRF31_BC (
Hemelaar, 2012a ) and the strict correlation between the South American
C variant and the C fragments of CRF60_BC, suggest that this novel CRF
arose in this continent. However, we cannot rule out the possibility
that CRF60_BC might have originated in Italy. Indeed, subtype C
represents the 13% of non-B variants in Italy and it is mostly harbored
by recent immigrants and Italian individuals who traveled to endemic
regions ( Lai et al., 2010 ). Additionally, our group recently conducted
a phylogeographic analysis revealing that the spread of subtype C in
Italy is related to the South American variant, likely due to
transmission chains among MSM ( Lai et al., 2014 ). Lastly, the finding
of a highly related isolate found in a French MSM in 2006 which differed
from the Italian CRF60_BC in a small portion of the *pol* gene, may
indicate that the former might have undergone a further recombination,
giving rise to the viral form detected in Italy ( Frange et al., 2008 ).
Although the phylogenetic approach is highly accurate for definition of
the origin of distinct subtypes and tracing their migration, it has
several limitations in identifying where or when the recombination event
occurred.

The epidemic impact of CRF60_BC is unpredictable; however, the
recognition of a large cluster of Italian patients from a Southern
Italian region and other distant regions of this country indicates that
this recombinant form has spread and may play a role especially among
young MSM. As is known for some CRFs, such as CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC and
CRF08_BC, their circulation in IDUs has led to a relevant outbreak
followed by epidemic waves.

Since the recombinogenic potential of RT has been recognized and
phylogenetic methods have been developed, new insights into the
generation of CRFs have permitted the tracing of their spread worldwide.
Continuous monitoring of HIV-1 diversity, coupled with prevention
programs, will assist in characterizing the genetic heterogeneity and
limiting its extension.


## Sequence data

The Gen-Bank accession number for the sequences reported in this paper
are: KC899079 , KC899080 , KC899081 .
