# Dolutegravir in HIV-2--Infected Patients With Resistant Virus to First-line Integrase Inhibitors From the French Named Patient Program


## Abstract

***Background.*** Dolutegravir has shown in vitro activity against human
immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2). We report safety and efficacy
data of regimens containing dolutegravir (50 mg twice daily) in
antiretroviral-experienced, HIV-2--infected patients.

***Methods.*** HIV-2--infected patients experiencing virological failure
to raltegravir received dolutegravir with optimized background
antiretroviral combinations within the French Named Patient Program
(NPP). Plasma HIV-2 RNA (pVL) was assessed at time of dolutegravir
initiation (baseline), month 3, and month 6. Antiretroviral trough
plasma concentrations (C ~12h~ ) were determined using liquid
chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry.

***Results.*** Thirteen HIV-2--infected-patients, with a median duration
of 15 years' infection and given 16 previous antiretroviral regimens,
were included in NPP. Median follow-up was 9 months (min--max, 3--15
months). Median baseline pVL and CD4 cell count were 9544 copies/mL
(inter quartile range \[IQR\], 3096--23 120 copies/mL) and 100 cells/µL
(IQR, 77--171 cells/µL), respectively. Available integrase genotypic
resistance patterns were Y143C/G/H/R (n = 5), Q148R/K (n = 2), and N155H
(n = 4). Optimized background antiretroviral regimens conferring a
genotypic sensitivity score ≤2 in 10 patients included nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors associated with darunavir/ritonavir (n
= 12), saquinavir/ritonavir (n = 2), and maraviroc (n = 3). At months 3
and 6, pVL was undetectable in 6 of 13 and 4 of 12 patients,
respectively, and median CD4 count was 161 (101--188) cells/µL and 167
(135--1353) cells/µL, respectively. Median dolutegravir C ~12h~ was 4086
(1756--5717 ng/mL) ng/mL in 9 patients. No serious events were notified
except 1 death from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy at month
4.

***Conclusions.*** Optimized dolutegravir-containing antiretroviral
regimens supported by good plasma exposure provide a substantial initial
efficacy rate for salvage therapy in heavily antiretroviral-experienced
HIV-2--infected patients with virus harboring resistance to
first-generation integrase inhibitors. Larger numbers of patients and
longer follow-up are needed to confirm these findings.



## METHODS

### Patients

HIV-2--infected adults (≥18 years of age) experiencing virological
failure to raltegravir-containing regimens, with virus harboring INSTI
resistance--associated mutations (at codons 66, 92, 97, 138, 140, 143,
147, 148, or 155) received dolutegravir 50 mg open label twice daily
with optimized background ARV combinations, based on baseline genotypic
resistance tests and/or previous treatment failures. The program was
conducted between December 2011 and September 2013 and was approved by
the French regulatory authority and by the ethics review committee.
Written informed consent was obtained from each individual before
screening. Demographic, biological, and therapeutic characteristics were
recorded.

### Virological Analyses

Plasma HIV-2 RNA quantification was performed by using an in-house
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction with a limit
of detection of 40 copies/mL \[ 20 \]. Samples were collected at time of
dolutegravir initiation (baseline), month 3, and month 6. Direct
sequencing of protease, reverse transcriptase, and integrase genes was
performed as previously described \[ 14 , 21 \]. Viral tropism was
genotypically predicted as previously described \[ 22 \]. Genotypic
resistance tests were interpreted according to the Agence nationale de
recherche sur le sida et les hépatites virales algorithm, version 23 (
www.frenchresistance.org) . Genotypic sensitivity score (GSS), taking
into account foscarnet susceptibility, was calculated for each patient.
HIV-2 group was evaluated by phylogenetic analyses of the reverse
transcriptase sequences and the consensus HIV-2 sequences using the Los
Alamos database ( www.hiv.lanl.gov ) as previously described \[ 23 , 24
\].

### Pharmacokinetic Analyses

Blood samples were collected during follow-up 12 ± 2 hours after the
last drug intake (C ~12h~ ). Simultaneous ARV plasma determinations were
performed using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry (Acquity UPLC/TQD, Waters Corporation, Milford,
Massachusetts) according to a modified previous method \[ 25 \].
Considering the lack of in vivo data on HIV-2 threshold plasma
concentrations and according to the respective daily dosage administered
(50 mg twice daily) to patients infected with HIV-2 harboring INSTI
resistance--associated mutations experiencing virological failure to
raltegravir-containing regimen, C ~12h~ was considered as adequate if
higher than the respective minimal value at the considered daily dose:
dolutegravir ≥1000 ng/mL, darunavir ≥2000 ng/mL, and maraviroc ≥50 ng/mL
\[ 26--28 \].


## RESULTS

A total of 13 ARV-experienced HIV-2--infected patients (10 men and 3
women) with a median age of 51 years (interquartile range \[IQR\],
50--54 years) received dolutegravir in the NPP. These patients received
a median of 11 previous ARV drugs (min--max, 6--17) before the
dolutegravir-containing regimen. The characteristics of the patients at
inclusion are summarized in the Tables 1 and 2 . The median duration of
HIV-2 known infection was 15 years (IQR, 10--20 years). The median
follow-up under dolutegravir was 9 months (range, 3--15 years). HIV-2
groups were categorized as A (n = 9), B (n = 3), and H (n = 1).



HIV-2 Plasma Viremia Decrease From Baseline at Month 6 According to
Baseline Resistance Patterns, Baseline Genotypic Sensitivity Score, and
Median Dolutegravir Plasma Concentration 12 Hours After the Last Drug
Intake Determined During Follow-up



HIV-2 Plasma Viremia Decrease From Baseline at Month 6 According to
Baseline Resistance Patterns, Baseline Genotypic Sensitivity Score, and
Median Dolutegravir Plasma Concentration 12 Hours After the Last Drug
Intake Determined During Follow-up


Abbreviations: C ~12h~ , median plasma concentration 12 hours after last
drug intake; DTG, dolutegravir; NA, not available.

At baseline, median plasma HIV-2 RNA level and CD4 cell count were 9544
copies/mL (3096--23 120 copies/mL) and 100 cells/µL (77--171 cells/µL),
respectively. HIV-2 tropism was genotypically predicted as CCR5 in 3
patients, whose CD4 counts were 62, 157, and 171 cells/µL, respectively.
Optimized background ARV regimens included nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate \[n = 3\],
zidovudine \[n = 4\], lamivudine or emtricitabine \[n = 8\], abacavir
\[n = 3\], didanosine \[n = 1\]) associated with ritonavir-boosted
darunavir 600/100 mg twice daily (n = 12), ritonavir-boosted saquinavir
1000/100 mg twice daily (n = 3), and maraviroc 150 mg twice daily (n =
3). Dual boosted protease inhibitor regimens consisting of
ritonavir-boosted darunavir/saquinavir and ritonavir-boosted
lopinavir/saquinavir were administered to 3 patients (patients 2, 3, and
8). Five patients also received a foscarnet 3-week induction treatment
associated with zidovudine in 4 cases. Genotypic sensitivity score was 3
(n = 3), 2 (n = 6), and 1 (n = 4), respectively. Baseline patterns of
protease, reverse transcriptase, and integrase resistance--associated
mutations and tropism are depicted in Table 2 . Available integrase
genotypic resistance patterns were Y143C/G/H/R (n = 5), Q148K/R/S (n =
2), and N155H (n = 4). Among them, T97A was present in all Y143
patterns. The E157Q mutation was observed in 2 cases, 1 with the
Y143C/G/H/R and 1 with the N155H integrase--associated resistance
mutations. Baseline integrase resistance pattern was missing in 1
patient due to lack of gene amplification. Table 2 depicts baseline
patterns of integrase-associated mutations and corresponding baseline
GSS, plasma HIV-2 RNA decrease between baseline and month 6, and median
dolutegravir C ~12h~ for each patient receiving the
dolutegravir-containing regimen. At month 3, plasma viral load below the
limit of detection was achieved in 5 of the 13 patients. Viral load
remained undetectable in the 4 patients tested at month 6. Median
decrease in plasma viral load was −1.31 (IQR, −2.01 to −0.93) log ~10~
copies/mL and −1.16 (IQR, −1.79 to −0.16) log ~10~ copies/mL at months 3
and 6, respectively. Median CD4 count rose from 100 cells/µL (IQR,
77--171 cells/µL) to 158 cells/µL (IQR, 101--188 cells/µL) and to 166
cells/µL (IQR, 135--353 cells/µL) at month 3 and month 6, respectively.
Among the 5 patients receiving foscarnet induction treatment, only 2 had
undetectable plasma viremia at months 3 and 6. All patients with
undetectable plasma HIV-2 RNA at month 6 had virus harboring the
integrase resistance pattern Y143C/G/H/R at baseline. Median
dolutegravir C ~12h~ was 4086 ng/mL (IQR, 1756--5717 ng/mL) in 9
patients during follow-up (Table 2 ). Median darunavir C ~12h~ ,
ritonavir C ~12h~ , and maraviroc C ~12h~ were 2981 ng/mL (IQR,
2169--5082 ng/mL), 250 ng/mL (IQR, 148--495 ng/mL), and 219 ng/mL (IQR,
219--555 ng/mL), respectively. Eighty-eight percent of dolutegravir C
~12h~ (23/26 measurements in 9 patients), 79% of darunavir C ~12h~
(19/25 measurements in 9 patients), and 100% of maraviroc C ~12h~ (11/11
measurements in 3 patients) were considered as adequate during the
follow-up. At month 6, despite the small number of samples, median
dolutegravir C ~12h~ in patients with plasma HIV-2 RNA \<40 copies/mL
(5496 ng/mL) tended to be higher than those in patients with detectable
plasma HIV-2 RNA at month 6 (2687 ng/mL). Moreover, among the 5 patients
demonstrating a viral load drop of at least −1.5 log ~10~ copies/mL
between baseline and month 6, median dolutegravir C ~12h~ was \>4000
ng/mL in the 4 patients with available data. The last patient had no
sample available for therapeutic drug monitoring.

One patient (patient 2) died from multifocal leukoencephalopathy at
month 4. No other serious clinical or biological events led to
dolutegravir discontinuation.

At month 6, integrase genotypes were available in 7 patients. The
selection of the T97A mutation was observed in 2 patients (patients 1
and 4). No change in the integrase gene could be evidenced in the 5
remaining patients.

At month 12, plasma viremia was available in 9 of the 13 patients.
Plasma viremia was undetectable in 3 patients (patients 3, 6, and 8) and
close to month 6 values in the 6 remaining patients (patients 1, 4, 7,
11, 12, and 13).


## DISCUSSION

This study is the first to explore efficacy and safety of a
dolutegravir-containing salvage regimen in HIV-2--infected patients who
had experienced virological failure while receiving
raltegravir-containing regimens and had genotypic evidence of
raltegravir resistance. Despite the small number of patients, these
preliminary results demonstrate that dolutegravir-containing regimens
provide a substantial efficacy rate for salvage therapy in heavily
ARV-experienced patients with virus harboring resistance to
first-generation INSTIs. Sustained virologic response up to 6 months was
observed in one-third of the patients, although immunological recovery
varied depending on the individual. In all of these patients, plasma
exposures of darunavir and maraviroc were adequate and particularly
elevated for dolutegravir, demonstrating good treatment adherence and
probably optimized for highly resistant virus.

Dolutegravir was well tolerated when administered at 50 mg twice daily,
consistent with safety data from other treatment studies \[ 29 , 30 \],
although the sample size was small. One patient died from progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy at month 4 despite a good virological
response at month 3.

As with other ARV drugs, durability of response is more likely when
there is support from background drug activity \[ 31 \]. In our study
dealing with multiexperienced HIV-2--infected patients, at least 2
active drugs in combination with dolutegravir were available for 9
patients. However, cohort studies of HIV-2--infected patients are
limited and have not addressed the central questions regarding the
optimal therapy for this virus as no large clinical trials are
available. Moreover, HIV-2 genotypic resistance interpretation systems,
relying on small studies, are most of the time based on
genotype/phenotype correlations and not on virological response as for
HIV-1. Therefore, GSS calculated for HIV-1 might be overestimated for
HIV-2. This possible weakness regarding genotyping interpretation might
explain why all patients did not respond to dolutegravir regimens
despite a GSS ≥2.

Foscarnet, a pyrophosphate analogue, prevents pyrophosphate exchange and
thereby inhibits DNA chain elongation catalysed by a variety of viral
DNA polymerases including HIV reverse transcriptase. Foscarnet
associated or not with zidovudine has been proposed as salvage therapy
for multi-experienced patients with late-stage HIV-1 infection and
limited therapeutic options \[ 32 , 33 \]. Thymidine-associated
mutations appear to render HIV hypersusceptible to foscarnet in vitro.
In HIV-2 infection, 1 case report described a marked decrease of plasma
HIV-2 load and improved immunological status in a heavily
ARV-experienced HIV-2--infected patient exhibiting multidrug-resistant
virus \[ 34 \]. Recently, a small series of HIV-1--infected patients
reported efficacy of the addition of foscarnet and zidovudine to various
dolutegravir combinations in salvage therapy \[ 35 \]. In our study, 5
patients received foscarnet associated with zidovudine during an
induction period of 3 weeks, and some experienced favorable response to
dolutegravir combination therapy. Indeed, 2 of them had an undetectable
plasma viral load at months 3 and 6. Viral load drop at month 3 varying
between −0.92 and −2.82 log ~10~ copies/mL was maintained above −1.0 log
~10~ copies/mL in 4 of the 5 patients at month 6.

In HIV-1, in vitro data as well as clinical data indicate that primary
mutations at codon 155 or 143 and the T66I and E92Q mutants remain
susceptible to dolutegravir, whereas mutations at codon 148 in the
presence of other secondary mutations can lead to decreased dolutegravir
efficacy \[ 36 , 37 \]. Indeed, in a subanalysis of cohort II of the
VIKING study, participants with current or previous raltegravir failure
and triple-class resistance (including INSTI) received dolutegravir 50
mg twice daily in addition to their failing regimen for 10 days, then
dolutegravir plus an optimized background regimen. Twelve of 13
participants with baseline Y143 and N155 mutations achieved HIV-1 RNA
load \<400 copies/mL at week 24, whereas 8 of 11 participants with Q148
plus ≥1 additional raltegravir-associated mutation achieved a viral load
\<400 copies/mL at week 24 \[ 37 \]. In the VIKING-3 trial, 183
participants with raltegravir and/or elvitegravir-resistant virus plus
resistance to at least 2 other ARV drug classes received open-label
dolutegravir 50 mg twice daily while continuing their failing regimen
(without raltegravir or elvitegravir). At day 8, an optimized background
regimen was started that included dolutegravir. Participants with the
T66, Y143, or N155 mutations had antiviral efficacy at week 24 of 100%,
75%, and 88%, respectively, indicating these that INSTI mutations alone
have little effect on dolutegravir. Those with a Q148 plus 1 secondary
mutation or Q148 plus at least 2 secondary mutations had 59% and 24%
response rates, respectively, indicating that the Q148 mutation pathway
can lead to decreased efficacy of dolutegravir as the number of
additional mutations increases \[ 29 \].

In our study, all patients with codons 148 or 155 integrase inhibitor
resistance--associated mutations achieved a detectable plasma viremia at
month 6, indicating that these profiles impact dolutegravir activity in
HIV-2. These data are consistent with in vitro susceptibility findings
obtained on clinical isolates or site-directed mutants \[ 12 , 38 \].
However, the impact of the Y143C mutation on dolutegravir susceptibility
is less clear. In our study, the 4 evaluable patients with virus
harboring this integrase mutation resistance profile, in association
with 72I, 97A, and 157Q mutations and without 148 or 155 mutations,
achieved undetectable viral load at months 3 and 6, showing that, as in
HIV-1, this mutation may have no or little effect on dolutegravir
susceptibility in vivo. However, in vitro the Y143C mutation in HIV-2
has been associated with reduced susceptibility to dolutegravir using
different types of phenotypic assays on clinical isolates and recently
on site-directed mutants \[ 12 , 38 \]. Although, in our series, the
143C amino acid substitution was present in only 1 case in mixture with
143G, the other mutants involving 143H/R or 143R in 3 cases and 143G in
1 case. This indicates that the different substitutions selected at
codon 143 may not impact dolutegravir activity in the same way, Y143C
being more deleterious. This has been recently described by Huang et al
in HIV-1 regarding the codon 148 where the Q148K substitution displayed
larger reductions in dolutegravir susceptibility than corresponding
Q148H/R \[ 39 , 40 \]. One patient with virus harboring the 147G
integrase resistance mutation, previously described as associated with
high level of resistance to elvitegravir in HIV-1, did not respond to
dolutegravir, suggesting that this mutation might impact dolutegravir
activity \[ 41 \]. In vitro phenotypic susceptibility assay of specific
mutant generated by site-directed mutagenesis is warranted to confirm
these data.

In our series, the R263K substitution, described in HIV-1 as
polymorphism but also selected under dolutegravir selective pressure \[
18 , 42 \], was not present at baseline in the 7 patients with
detectable plasma viremia at month 6 for whom genotyping was available.
The selection of additional T97A integrase resistance mutation was
evidenced at month 6 in 2 patients harboring virus with N155H resistance
profile, indicating that this mutation might play a role in dolutegravir
resistance. Larger studies are needed to confirm these data.

In our series, the plasma exposure of ritonavir-boosted darunavir and
maraviroc was adequate in the majority of the patients and that of
dolutegravir was particularly elevated, partly because of double daily
dose and partly because of food effect, demonstrating good treatment
adherence during the follow-up despite the pill burden of twice-daily
dosing in association with foscarnet intensification. These plasma
exposures were also particularly appropriate and optimized for highly
resistant HIV-2. In HIV-1--infected patients, a well-characterized
exposure--response relationship was demonstrated for dolutegravir
monotherapy, with levels of antiviral activity increasing with
escalating doses of dolutegravir. The finding that the concentration at
the end of dosing interval was the pharmacokinetic parameter that best
predicted a reduction in plasma HIV-1 RNA from baseline to day 11 is
consistent with the observation that antiviral activity is associated
with the maintenance of therapeutic plasma concentrations throughout the
dosing interval \[ 43 \]. In our study, a similar behavior of
dolutegravir at double daily dose could be observed on HIV-2, with
highly elevated median dolutegravir C ~12h,~ conferring a well-preserved
inhibitory quotient value despite raltegravir-associated mutations.
Moreover, in the 4 patients with available pharmacokinetic data and
infected with resistant HIV-2 harboring a single integrase-associated
mutation as N155H or Y143C/G/H/R, a dolutegravir C ~12h~ of at least
4000 ng/mL confers an antiviral potency to the containing regimen
capable of producing a −1.5 log ~10~ decrease of plasma HIV-2 RNA. In
another way, the higher median dolutegravir C ~12h~ tended to be
associated with undetectable plasma HIV-2 RNA. Finally, the good plasma
exposure of 50 mg dolutegravir twice daily seems to provide advantage in
terms of antiviral efficacy on resistant HIV-2, without any deleterious
adverse effects.

In conclusion, these preliminary results demonstrated for the first time
that dolutegravir-containing regimens might provide a substantial
initial efficacy rate for salvage therapy in heavily ARV-experienced
HIV-2--infected patients harboring virus without the Q148 or N155
integrase inhibitor mutation profiles. Cross-resistance of
first-generation INSTIs with dolutegravir seems to be higher in HIV-2
than in HIV-1. Larger patient numbers and longer follow-up are warranted
to confirm these findings.
