This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential
site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and
targeted advertising. To learn more, view the following link: Privacy
Policy

-   Skip to Article Content
-   Skip to Article Information

Search within This Journal Anywhere

-
Search term

-

Login / Register

::: {role="main"}

Journal of Medical Virology

Volume 87, Issue 6 p. 978-984

Research Article

Full Access


# Limited increase in primary HIV-1C drug resistance mutations in treatment naïve individuals in Ethiopia

Kahsay Huruy ,

Melanie Maier ,

Andargachew Mulu ,

Uwe G. Liebert ,

First published: 03 February 2015

https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.24110

Citations: 8

Find it @ Stanford

Conflict of interest: None.

Authors\' contribution: KH, MM, AM and UGL participated in the design,
analysis, and interpretation of the study results. First draft was
prepared by KH and MM; final version was prepared by UGL. All authors
approved the final manuscript.

Sections

PDF

Tools

Share

::: section

## Abstract

Antiretroviral drug resistance is a major challenge for management and
control of HIV-1 infection worldwide and particularly in resource
limited countries. The frequency of primary drug resistance mutations
(DRMs) and of naturally occurring polymorphisms was determined in 83
antiretroviral treatment (ART) naïve Ethiopian individuals infected with
HIV-1, consecutively enrolled in 2010. In all individuals HIV-1C was
found. The median (interquartile range) of CD4 ^+^ T-cell count and
viral load were 100 (49--201) cells/μl and 44,640 (12,553--134,664)
copies/ml, respectively. Protease (PR) and reverse transcriptase (RT)
genes of HIV-1 RNA were amplified and sequenced. The proportion of
primary DRM to any drug class, using the World Health Organization
mutation lists, was 7.2% (6/83), thus exceeding the WHO threshold limit
of 5%. Three individuals (3.6%) had non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor (NNRTI) mutations, two individuals (2.4%) had protease
inhibitor mutations, and one (1.2%) had mutations associated with two
drug classes (nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor and NNRTI). In
addition, the frequency of polymorphisms in the PR and RT genes was
higher compared with previous studies in Ethiopian as well as worldwide
isolates. Hence, genotypic drug resistance testing as part of routine
management of individuals seems reasonable even in resource limited
countries prior to treatment in order to allow proper choice of ART.
***J. Med. Virol. 87:978--984, 2015* .** © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

Infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) remain a major world-wide health
problem. In 2012 an estimated 35 million people were living with the
virus. Like other sub-Saharan Africa countries, Ethiopia is heavily
affected with approximately 760,000 individuals living with HIV/AIDS and
an adult prevalence of 1.3% \[UNAIDS, 2013 \]. The availability of
antiretroviral treatment (ART) has led to a significant decrease in
mortality and morbidity rates of HIV-1 \[UNAIDS, 2013 \]. According to
the World Health Organization (WHO) report the number of individuals
receiving ART in low- and middle-income nations increased approximately
32-fold from 2002 to 2012 \[WHO, 2013 \]. However, antiretroviral drug
resistance remains a major challenge for management and control of HIV-1
infection \[Imaz et al., 2011 \]. The large-scale accessibility of ART
regimens in resource-constrained settings also bears the risk of an
unnoticed evolution of resistant variants in ART experienced patients
and their subsequent transmission \[Deeks, 2008 \]. The awareness of
primary DRM led to the recommendation for HIV-1 drug resistance testing
as soon as HIV-1 infection is diagnosed \[Hirsch et al., 2008 \].
Primary DRM has declined over time in Europe \[Wittkop et al., 2011 \].
In contrast, in the United States and Africa, the frequency of primary
DRM is rising \[Frentz et al., 2012 ; Hamers et al., 2013 \].

In Ethiopia, free ART program was initiated in the late 2005 and since
then has been significantly scaled-up with an overall ART coverage of
68% by the end of 2012 ( http://www.etharc.org , accessed April 08,
2014). There is a dearth of literature on HIV-1 primary DRM, except
studies conducted in 2003 \[Kassu et al., 2007 \] and in 2005 \[Abegaz
et al., 2008 \] before the introduction of free ART, and a study
conducted in 2008 \[Mulu et al., 2014 \] 3 years after commencement of
free-of-charge ART distribution to HIV-1 treatment naïve individuals.
The former reported between 0 and 2.2% resistance mutations in RT gene.
However, increased level of primary DRM reaching 5%, in RT region was
reported a few years later \[Mulu et al., 2014 \]. Therefore, the
frequency of primary DRMs and the occurrence of polymorphisms was
analyzed among treatment naïve Ethiopian individuals infected with HIV-1
enrolled in 2010 in order to assess the trend and potential alteration
of primary DRM and polymorphisms.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Blood samples were collected consecutively in 2010 from 83 HIV-1
infected but ART naïve individuals of Gondar University teaching
hospital (n = 61), located in the high plateau of northern Ethiopia and
of Metema hospital (n = 22), located in northwestern Ethiopia on the
border to Sudan. The minimum of samples required had been calculated as
49 by considering 95% confidence interval and 3.3% proportion of primary
DRM based on the previous study and 5% margin of error. The
Institutional Review Board of the University of Gondar approved the
study (RPO 55/258/2001).

Blood was drawn from each patient into EDTA treated tubes after a
written consent had been obtained. Socio-demographic and clinical data
were collected using a pre-designed structured questionnaire. The
inclusion criteria for individuals were no history of previous ART,
age \> 18 years, and no current pregnancy. CD4 ^+^ T-cell count was
performed using Flow Cytometer (FACScount system; Becton Dickinson, San
Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer\'s specifications. HIV was
diagnosed based on agglutination and immunochromatographic tests for the
detection of antibodies in serum, plasma or whole blood samples using
Determine™, Capillus™, and Uni-Gold™ kits (
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADO095.pdf ).

Samples for HIV viral load determination and nucleic acid sequencing
were immediately frozen and were kept below −20°C until used.
Extraction, quantitation, amplification, and sequencing of HIV-1 were
done as described previously \[Mulu et al., 2014 \]. Briefly, the Abbott
m2000sp and m2000rt systems were used for HIV-1 viral load
determination. Protease (PR) and reverse transcriptase (RT) of *pol*
encompassing codons 1 to 99 and 1 to 331, respectively, were reverse
transcribed and amplified by nested PCR using in-house primers. To
demonstrate the absence of contaminating HIV-1 proviral DNA, extracted
nucleic acid was also subjected to PCR omitting the RT step, resulting
in no amplification product. After gel-purification (Wizard SV Gel and
PCR Clean-up kit; Promega, Madison, WI), PCR products were sequenced
using the fluorescent dideoxy-terminator method (Big Dye Terminator kit;
Applied Biosystem, Foster City, CA) using an automated population-based
sequencer (ABI Prism 310; Applied Biosystem, Foster City, CA). Raw
electropherograms were edited manually using Geneious software version
5.4 \[Drummond et al., 2011 \]. FASTA files were analysed according to
the list of mutations for surveillance of transmitted HIV-1 drug
resistance \[Bennett et al., 2009 ; WHO list 2009\]. Subtype
determination was done using the Stanford University HIV-1 drug
resistance database subtyping tool and was reconfirmed using the Rega
HIV-1 subtyping tool, version 2.0 ( http://www.bioafrica.net/subtypetool
, last accession October 14, 2013).

The phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighbour-joining method
from data generated from the *pol* gene region (RT and PR genes), and
the reliability of the branching orders was assessed using the bootstrap
approach in MEGA version 5 \[Tamura et al., 2011 \]. Nine reference
strains representing HIV subtype C were included for comparison. The
nucleotide sequences analysed were submitted to GenBank with the
accession numbers KJ807649--KJ807731. Samples belonging to transmission
clusters were traced back, to exclude possible contamination.

Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS software, version 18.0
(SPSS, Chicago, IL). Both parametric and non-parametric tests were
employed to determine the statistical significance of relationships
between DRM of this study and previous reports from Ethiopia, and
polymorphism frequencies of present study sequences, reports from
Ethiopian isolates and worldwide subtype C isolates. *P-* value \<0.05
was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
Descriptive statistics were performed for socio-demographic and clinical
characteristics. Mean and standard deviation (SD) are presented for
normally distributed variables, and median and interquartile range (IQR)
for non-normally distributed variables. 95% confidence intervals (CI)
were computed by GraphPad Prism software version 5 (San Diego, CA).

::: section

## RESULTS

Epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics of the 83
individuals included in the study are summarized in Table I . Most of
them were male (61.4%) and the median (IQR) age was 30 (28--36) years.
The median (IQR) of white blood count was 4,600 (3,600--6,000) cells/μl.
The differential white blood count (mean ± SD) was neutrophils
(57.5 ± 13.6%) and lymphocytes (30.8 ± 10%). At time of sampling most of
the individuals had opportunistic infections (OIs), e.g., tuberculosis
(43.4%), visceral leishmaniasis (6%), oropharyngeal candidiasis (1.2%).
The median (IQR) CD4 ^+^ T-cell count was 100 (49--201) cells/μl and the
median (IQR) HIV viral load was 44,640 (12,553--134,664) copies/ml. All
individuals were infected by HIV-1C, and four monophyletic transmission
clusters with bootstrap value of 99% involving eight individuals (9.6%,
patient IDs G221/M058, M030/M074, G269/G018, and M029/M039) were
detected (Fig. 1 ). On trace-back possible contamination of
corresponding samples was excluded, as samples were collected as well as
processed at different time points.

Table I. Characteristics of the Study Subjects

Parameters                              N
--------------------------------------- ---- -------
Gender
Female                                  32   38.6%
Male                                    51   61.4%
Age group in years
19--28                                  23   27.7%
29--38                                  45   54.2%
39--48                                  10   12.0%
\>49                                    5    6.0%
Baseline CD4 ^+^ T-cells (cells/μl)
\<50                                    22   26.5%
50--99                                  19   22.9%
100--199                                21   25.3%
200--299                                17   20.5%
\>300                                   4    4.8%
Baseline white blood count (cells/μl)
1.2--2.99                               13   16.7%
3.0--3.99                               14   17.9%
4.0--4.99                               16   20.5%
\>5.0                                   35   44.9%
not determined                          5    --
Baseline hemoglobin (g/dl)
\< 7.5                                  3    3.9%
7.5--10.5                               24   31.2%
10.6--11.9                              19   24.7%
\>12.0                                  31   40.3%
not determined                          6    --
Baseline HIV RNA load (copies/ml)
\< 2,000                                4    4.8%
2,000--10,000                           14   16.9%
10,001--100,000                         37   44.6%
100,001--500,000                        27   32.5%
\>500,000                               1    1.2%

In 6 of the 83 individuals (7.2%) primary DRM was detected (Table II ).
Eighty three percent of them (5/6) were female, and 67% (4/6) had CD4
^+^ T-cell count \<100 cells/μl and had OIs. Their mean age (± SD) was
33.2 (± 5.8) years, the median (IQR) viral load was 26,714
(12,528--188,982) copies/ml and the mean (± SD) CD4+ cell count was 111
(± 95.7) cells/μl. Distribution of primary DRM had no association with
age, or low CD4 ^+^ T-cell count ( *P* \> 0.05) but statistically higher
primary DRM was found in females compared to males ( *P* \< 0,05). The
median (IQR) viral load of 49,661 (11,382--137,238) and the median (IQR)
CD4 ^+^ T-cell count of 101 (49--200) of individuals without primary DRM
was not statistically different from those with primary DRM.

Table II. pDRMs in Treatment Naïve Ethiopian Individuals Infected With
HIV-1C

Sample ID   Age (years)   Gender   Geographic location   HIV RNA (copies/ml)   CD4 ^+^ T-cells (count/μl)   WBC (count/μl × 10 ^−3^ )   Hgb (g/dl)   OIs     pDRMs
----------- ------------- -------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------------------------- --------------------------- ------------ ------- ------- ------- ------
NRTI    NNRTI   PI
G014        35            Female   Gondar                448,983               253                          6.5                         10           ---     ---     G190A   ---
G174        30            Female   Gondar                33,222                34                           4.5                         12.3         ---     ---     G190E   ---
G043        44            Female   Gondar                20,205                62                           5.5                         17           Opc     ---     ---     M46I
G025        30            Male     Gondar                102,315               16                           1.9                         9.3          TB+LD   M184I   Y181I   ---
M086        28            Female   Metema                12,916                201                          n.d.                        n.d.         TB      ---     G190A   ---
M075        32            Female   Metema                11,363                99                           2.9                         10           TB      ---     ---     I85V

-   WBC, white blood count; Hgb, hemoglobin; OIs, opportunistic
infections; pDRMs, primary drug resistance mutations; ---, not
detected; TB, tuberculosis; LD, visceral leishmaniasis; Opc,
oropharyngeal candidiasis; NRTI, nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor; NNRTI, non-NRTI; PI, protease inhibitor.

The frequency of primary DRM to any drug class, based on the WHO
mutation lists, was 7.2% (6/83). The prevalence of primary DRM at Gondar
and Metema cities, were 6.6% (4/61, CI: 2.2--16.1%) and 9.1% (2/22, CI:
1.3--29%), respectively (Table II ). Three (3.6%) individuals had
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) mutations, 2
(2.4%) individuals had protease inhibitor (PI) mutations and one (1.2%)
had two-class pDRMs against nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
(NRTI) and NNRTI. The NNRTI associated primary DRMs included: G190A
(n = 2), and G190E (n = 1). Additionally, one patient exhibited two
pDRMs, one against NRTI (M184I) and the other against NNRTI (Y181I), and
PI mutations (M46I and I85V, respectively) were detected in one patient
each.

Polymorphisms were defined as any alteration from subtype B consensus
sequence ( http://HIVdb.stanford.edu , last accession April 04, 2014)
and the occurrence of polymorphisms higher than 3.6% was taken into
consideration in the present study. Polymorphism frequencies of PR and
RT of the present isolates were compared with those of the worldwide
subtype C isolates extracted from Stanford HIV database (n = 7,614 for
PR and n = 9,150 for RT). Polymorphism frequencies in the PR were
similar to global isolates except position T12 (42.2%) and L19 (49.4%)
with lower rates. In the RT however, the polymorphism frequency
significantly diverged at more positions. Position K49 (18.1%), A98
(27.7%), K102 (10.8%), D123 (84.3%), I142 (15.7%), A158 (44.6%), K173
(98.8%), Q174 (55.4%), D177 (92.8%), I195 (7.2%), G196 (19.3%), I202
(16.9%), E248 (25.3%), K249 (10.8%), P294 (27.7%), K311 (15.7%), Y319
(4.8%), and E328 (32.5%) with higher rates and S48 (88.1%), V60 (41%),
S162 (27.7%), V292 (93%), and I293 (94%) with lower rates (data not
shown).

Comparing the polymorphism frequency to Ethiopian HIV-1C infections
reported in previous studies \[Grossman et al., 2001 , data from
1999/2000; Kassu et al., 2007 , data from 2003; and Mulu et al., 2014 ,
data from 2008\], there is an increasing trend at several positions in
PR (I13, G16, N37, L63, T74, and V82) as well as in RT (V60, K102, I202)
(Table III ).

Table III. Comparative Analysis of the Relative Frequencies of Selected
Amino Acid Polymorphisms Detected in HIV-1C Isolates from Treatment
Naïve Ethiopian Individuals

Current study Data from 2010 (n = 83)   Mulu et al. Data from 2008 (n = 160)   Kassu et al. Data from 2003 (n = 92)   Grossmann et al. Data from 1999/2000 (n = 20)
----------------------- --------------------------------------- -------------------------------------- -------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------
Protease
L10                     3.6                                     5.0                                    2.2                                    0
T12                     42.2                                    45.0                                   0                                      0
I13                     12.0                                    5.0                                    7.0                                    0
G16                     21.7                                    11.3                                   16.0                                   0
L19                     49.4                                    55.0                                   0                                      0
K20                     14.5                                    13.8                                   12.0                                   25.0
E35                     10.8                                    11.9                                   6.0                                    0
M36                     96.4                                    93.0                                   97.0                                   95.0
N37                     16.9                                    6.3                                    4.0                                    0
L63                     65.1                                    57.5                                   52.0                                   20.0
I64                     4.8                                     9.4                                    1.0                                    0
T74                     15.7                                    9.4                                    11.0                                   0
V82                     12.0                                    7.5                                    9.0                                    0
L89                     81.9                                    81.3                                   93.0                                   93.0
I93                     94.0                                    88.8                                   98.0                                   80.0
Reverse transcriptase
S48                     36.1                                    31.2                                   45.0                                   0
V60                     18.1                                    10.0                                   14.0                                   0
A98                     27.7                                    24.4                                   31.0                                   20.0
K102                    10.8                                    5.6                                    3.0                                    0
I135                    26.5                                    27.5                                   12.5                                   0
K166                    9.6                                     15.0                                   29.2                                   0
I178                    19.3                                    25.0                                   8.3                                    0
I202                    16.9                                    13.8                                   4.2                                    0
R211                    71.1                                    53.1                                   70.8                                   0

::: section

## DISCUSSION

In this study, profiles of drug resistance among treatment naive
individuals enrolled in 2010 were investigated. Using in-house primers,
amplification and sequencing success rate was 97%. This is higher
compared to previous reports conducted in Ethiopia \[52%, Abegaz et al.,
2008 \], South Africa \[51%, Pillay et al., 2008 \] and Mozambique
\[61%, Bartolo et al., 2009 \].

More than 7% of individuals were found to have primary DRMs based on
population genotyping. The data of the present study were compared with
previous studies conducted in Ethiopian individuals, who reported 2.2%
in 2003 \[Kassu et al., 2007 \] and none (0%) in 2005 \[Abegaz et al.,
2008 \]. However, the present finding is in accordance with previous
reports conducted in sub-Saharan African countries that indicated
proportions of primary DRM mutations in treatment naïve individuals
ranging from 5% to 12.5% \[Ndembi et al., 2008 ; Tebit et al., 2009 ;
Haidara et al., 2010 ; Hamers et al., 2012 ; Mulu et al., 2014 \]. The
results of the present study are in agreement with reports from USA and
Europe, which noted reported 12.9% and 10.9% primary DRMs, respectively
\[Frentz et al., 2012 \]. Hence, monitoring for primary DRMs in regions
of low- and middle-income nations is important to prevent negative
effects of ill-adapted ART \[Gupta et al., 2012 \].

The prevalence of HIV-1 drug resistance in the present study with
samples collected 5 years after free access to ART regimes became
available in Ethiopia exceeds those reported in studies conducted prior
to introduction of ART ( *P* \< 0.05). Although statistically not
different, the primary DRM rate in the present study is higher than the
5% reported from samples obtained 3 years earlier \[Mulu et al., 2014
\]. This suggests there is an increasing trend of DRM in the setting
(Fig. 2 ) and supports the notion that scaling up of ART will drive the
emergence of primary DRM. Particularly, unlike recently published
findings, major mutations (M46I and I85V) conferring resistance to PIs
were detected and this conceivably is a consequence of increased access
to PIs since 2008. Currently, however, the I85V mutation has no effect
on boosted PIs \[Lambert-Niclot et al., 2012 \].

Three in four primary DRMs identified in this study are related to
NNRTI. This is consistent with the current observations of significant
increase in NNRTI resistance. While the proportion of NNRTI resistance
was below 1% in 2003, it amounted to 6.4% in 2010 \[WHO, 2012 \]. The
higher rate of NNRTI related resistance in the present study (4.8%) was
also consistent with more recent studies conducted in Ethiopia and other
east African countries \[Gupta et al., 2012 ; Mulu et al., 2014 \]. This
may be due to the use of NNRTI as part of standard first-line treatment
in combination with the low genetic barrier to resistance. A single
nucleotide substitution such as G190A/E may confer a high level of
resistance to one substance or even the entire class of NNRTIs \[Johnson
et al., 2007 \].

The proportion of polymorphisms varies between and within subtypes, and
polymorphisms that are occurring naturally may contribute to the
evolution of HIV-1 drug resistance \[Svicher et al., 2006 ; Theys et
al., 2013 \]. In HIV-1B infection, polymorphisms strongly correlate with
virological failure and influence polymerase replication capacity
\[Garriga et al., 2009 ; Ng et al., 2014 \]. However, according to some
reports the clinical significance of polymorphisms remains controversial
\[Taylor et al., 2008 ; Theys et al., 2013 \].

The comparatively higher abundance of polymorphisms at different
positions of the RT gene region in the present study, compared to
worldwide HIV-1C isolates, indicates a significant genetic variation of
the reverse transcriptase within subtype C \[Huang et al., 2012 ; Theys
et al., 2013 \]. Compared to previous HIV-1 isolates from Ethiopia
\[Grossmann et al., 2001 ; Kassu et al., 2007 ; Mulu et al., 2014 \] the
RT and gene polymorphism rate was higher, which could be due to the
dynamic and continuous evolution of the HIV-1C strains over time
\[Gonzalez et al., 2010 \], but nevertheless it possibly just reflects
the high diversity within subtypes across geographic regions. More
longitudinal studies are needed to ascertain the possible association
\[Huang et al., 2012 \].

In summary, in the present study primary DRMs are as common as 7.2% and
most of them are caused by NNRTI. The proportion of sequences with
primary DRM with NRTIs (M184I and Y181I), NNRTIs (G190AE) and PIs (M46I
and I85V) is 1.2%, 3.6% and 2.4%, respectively. The occurrence of PI
resistance mutations is reported for the first time in Ethiopia. As the
overall frequency of pDRMs has risen beyond the 5% recommended by WHO
for threshold surveillance, genotypic drug resistance testing prior to
treatment should be considered as part of routine management of
individuals even in countries with limited resources in order to choose
appropriate first-line ART or at least to allow a rapid switch to
alternative drugs.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Expert technical assistance by Ms. Sandra Bergs and Ms. Janka Rätzke is
gratefully acknowledged. We also thank the patients for their
participation in the study.


##

Citing Literature

Volume 87 , Issue 6

June 2015

Pages 978-984

-

## Figures

-

## References

-

## Related

-

## Information

### Recommended

-
HIV‐1 reverse transcriptase drug‐resistance mutations in chronically
infected individuals receiving or naïve to HAART in Cameroon

Sherri T. Burda , Ragupathy Viswanath , Jiangqin Zhao , Thompson
Kinge , Christopher Anyangwe , Erick T. Tinyami , Bijayesh Haldar ,
Rebecca L.R. Powell , Veronica Jarido , Indira K. Hewlett ,
Phillipe N. Nyambi ,

Journal of Medical Virology

-
Drug‐resistance mutations in antiretroviral‐naïve patients with
established HIV‐1 infection in Mexico

M Escoto-Delgadillo , E Vázquez-Valls , M Ramírez-Rodríguez , A
Corona-Nakamura , G Amaya-Tapia , N Quintero-Pérez , A Panduro-Cerda
, BM Torres-Mendoza ,

HIV Medicine

Download PDF

back


## Additional links

### About Wiley Online Library

-   Privacy Policy
-   Terms of Use
-   About Cookies
-   Manage Cookies
-   Accessibility
-   Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
-   Developing World Access

### Help & Support

-   Contact Us
-   Training and Support
-   DMCA & Reporting Piracy

### Opportunities

-   Subscription Agents
-   Advertisers & Corporate Partners

### Connect with Wiley

-   The Wiley Network
-   Wiley Press Room

Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All
rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training
of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```


## Figure 1

Figure 1 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint The neighbour-joining phylogenetic tree depicting the relationship between viral RNA sequences from 83 treatment naïve individuals of Gondar teaching hospital (G) and Metema hospital (M) in northwest Ethiopia. Sequences with primary drug resistance mutations are indicated (black circles). For comparison 9 reference strains (empty circles) from the Los Alamos HIV-1 database representing subtype C with GenBank accession numbers U46016 (Ethiopia C), AF067155 (India C), AF110980 (Botswana C), AF361874 (Tanzania C), AY772699 (S Africa C), U52953 (Brazil C), AF286233 (Israel C), AF286230 (China C), AF286225 (Zambia C) are included. Sequences of this study were submitted to GenBank with the accession numbers KJ807649–KJ807731.


## Figure 2

Figure 2 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Comparison of major primary drug resistance mutations identified in treatment naïve Ethiopian individuals infected with HIV-1C. Dark grey column: current study (sampled in 2010), grey column: Mulu et al., 2014 (sampled in 2008), light grey column: Kassu et al., 2007 (samples from 2003).




## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th>    Parameters   </th><th>    N   </th><td></td></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="3">   Gender  </td></tr><tr><td>   Female  </td><td>   32  </td><td>   38.6%  </td></tr><tr><td>   Male  </td><td>   51  </td><td>   61.4%  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">   Age group in years  </td></tr><tr><td>   19–28  </td><td>   23  </td><td>   27.7%  </td></tr><tr><td>   29–38  </td><td>   45  </td><td>   54.2%  </td></tr><tr><td>   39–48  </td><td>   10  </td><td>   12.0%  </td></tr><tr><td>   &gt;49  </td><td>   5  </td><td>   6.0%  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">   Baseline CD4   <sup>    +   </sup>   T-cells (cells/μl)  </td></tr><tr><td>   &lt;50  </td><td>   22  </td><td>   26.5%  </td></tr><tr><td>   50–99  </td><td>   19  </td><td>   22.9%  </td></tr><tr><td>   100–199  </td><td>   21  </td><td>   25.3%  </td></tr><tr><td>   200–299  </td><td>   17  </td><td>   20.5%  </td></tr><tr><td>   &gt;300  </td><td>   4  </td><td>   4.8%  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">   Baseline white blood count (cells/μl)  </td></tr><tr><td>   1.2–2.99  </td><td>   13  </td><td>   16.7%  </td></tr><tr><td>   3.0–3.99  </td><td>   14  </td><td>   17.9%  </td></tr><tr><td>   4.0–4.99  </td><td>   16  </td><td>   20.5%  </td></tr><tr><td>   &gt;5.0  </td><td>   35  </td><td>   44.9%  </td></tr><tr><td>   not determined  </td><td>   5  </td><td>   –  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">   Baseline hemoglobin (g/dl)  </td></tr><tr><td>   &lt; 7.5  </td><td>   3  </td><td>   3.9%  </td></tr><tr><td>   7.5–10.5  </td><td>   24  </td><td>   31.2%  </td></tr><tr><td>   10.6–11.9  </td><td>   19  </td><td>   24.7%  </td></tr><tr><td>   &gt;12.0  </td><td>   31  </td><td>   40.3%  </td></tr><tr><td>   not determined  </td><td>   6  </td><td>   –  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">   Baseline HIV RNA load (copies/ml)  </td></tr><tr><td>   &lt; 2,000  </td><td>   4  </td><td>   4.8%  </td></tr><tr><td>   2,000–10,000  </td><td>   14  </td><td>   16.9%  </td></tr><tr><td>   10,001–100,000  </td><td>   37  </td><td>   44.6%  </td></tr><tr><td>   100,001–500,000  </td><td>   27  </td><td>   32.5%  </td></tr><tr><td>   &gt;500,000  </td><td>   1  </td><td>   1.2%  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th>    Sample ID   </th><th>    Age (years)   </th><th>    Gender   </th><th>    Geographic location   </th><th>    HIV RNA (copies/ml)   </th><th>    CD4    <sup>     +    </sup>    T-cells (count/μl)   </th><th>    WBC (count/μl × 10    <sup>     −3    </sup>    )   </th><th>    Hgb (g/dl)   </th><th>    OIs   </th><th colspan="3">    pDRMs   </th></tr></thead><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   NRTI  </td><td>   NNRTI  </td><td>   PI  </td></tr><tr><td>   G014  </td><td>   35  </td><td>   Female  </td><td>   Gondar  </td><td>   448,983  </td><td>   253  </td><td>   6.5  </td><td>   10  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   G190A  </td><td>   —  </td></tr><tr><td>   G174  </td><td>   30  </td><td>   Female  </td><td>   Gondar  </td><td>   33,222  </td><td>   34  </td><td>   4.5  </td><td>   12.3  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   G190E  </td><td>   —  </td></tr><tr><td>   G043  </td><td>   44  </td><td>   Female  </td><td>   Gondar  </td><td>   20,205  </td><td>   62  </td><td>   5.5  </td><td>   17  </td><td>   Opc  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   M46I  </td></tr><tr><td>   G025  </td><td>   30  </td><td>   Male  </td><td>   Gondar  </td><td>   102,315  </td><td>   16  </td><td>   1.9  </td><td>   9.3  </td><td>   TB+LD  </td><td>   M184I  </td><td>   Y181I  </td><td>   —  </td></tr><tr><td>   M086  </td><td>   28  </td><td>   Female  </td><td>   Metema  </td><td>   12,916  </td><td>   201  </td><td>   n.d.  </td><td>   n.d.  </td><td>   TB  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   G190A  </td><td>   —  </td></tr><tr><td>   M075  </td><td>   32  </td><td>   Female  </td><td>   Metema  </td><td>   11,363  </td><td>   99  </td><td>   2.9  </td><td>   10  </td><td>   TB  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   —  </td><td>   I85V  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 2

<table><thead><tr><td></td><th>    Current study Data from 2010 (n = 83)   </th><th>    Mulu et al. Data from 2008 (n = 160)   </th><th>    Kassu et al. Data from 2003 (n = 92)   </th><th>    Grossmann et al. Data from 1999/2000 (n = 20)   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="5">   Protease  </td></tr><tr><td>   L10  </td><td>   3.6  </td><td>   5.0  </td><td>   2.2  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   T12  </td><td>   42.2  </td><td>   45.0  </td><td>   0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   I13  </td><td>   12.0  </td><td>   5.0  </td><td>   7.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   G16  </td><td>   21.7  </td><td>   11.3  </td><td>   16.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   L19  </td><td>   49.4  </td><td>   55.0  </td><td>   0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   K20  </td><td>   14.5  </td><td>   13.8  </td><td>   12.0  </td><td>   25.0  </td></tr><tr><td>   E35  </td><td>   10.8  </td><td>   11.9  </td><td>   6.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   M36  </td><td>   96.4  </td><td>   93.0  </td><td>   97.0  </td><td>   95.0  </td></tr><tr><td>   N37  </td><td>   16.9  </td><td>   6.3  </td><td>   4.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   L63  </td><td>   65.1  </td><td>   57.5  </td><td>   52.0  </td><td>   20.0  </td></tr><tr><td>   I64  </td><td>   4.8  </td><td>   9.4  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   T74  </td><td>   15.7  </td><td>   9.4  </td><td>   11.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   V82  </td><td>   12.0  </td><td>   7.5  </td><td>   9.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   L89  </td><td>   81.9  </td><td>   81.3  </td><td>   93.0  </td><td>   93.0  </td></tr><tr><td>   I93  </td><td>   94.0  </td><td>   88.8  </td><td>   98.0  </td><td>   80.0  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">   Reverse transcriptase  </td></tr><tr><td>   S48  </td><td>   36.1  </td><td>   31.2  </td><td>   45.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   V60  </td><td>   18.1  </td><td>   10.0  </td><td>   14.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   A98  </td><td>   27.7  </td><td>   24.4  </td><td>   31.0  </td><td>   20.0  </td></tr><tr><td>   K102  </td><td>   10.8  </td><td>   5.6  </td><td>   3.0  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   I135  </td><td>   26.5  </td><td>   27.5  </td><td>   12.5  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   K166  </td><td>   9.6  </td><td>   15.0  </td><td>   29.2  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   I178  </td><td>   19.3  </td><td>   25.0  </td><td>   8.3  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   I202  </td><td>   16.9  </td><td>   13.8  </td><td>   4.2  </td><td>   0  </td></tr><tr><td>   R211  </td><td>   71.1  </td><td>   53.1  </td><td>   70.8  </td><td>   0  </td></tr></table>



