Infection with the frequently transmitted HIV-1 M41L variant has no
influence on selection of tenofovir resistance \| Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy \| Oxford Academic

Skip to Main Content

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

Journals

Books

-

-

-

-

-

-

-
Sign in through your institution

-   Issues
-   More Content
-   BSAC Journals
-   Submit
-   Purchase
-   Alerts
-   About

Close

Navbar Search Filter Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy This issue
BSAC Journals Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Infectious Diseases
Medical Microbiology and Virology Books Journals Oxford Academic Enter
search term Search

Advanced Search

Article Navigation

Volume 70

Issue 2

February 2015

### Article Contents

-
Introduction

-
Methods

-
Results

-
Discussion

-
Funding

-
Transparency declarations

-
Acknowledgements

-
References

-
Supplementary data

-   \< Previous
-   Next \>

-    PDF

-    Split View

-

-
Cite

-

* Permissions Icon * Permissions

-   * Share Icon * Share

Close

Navbar Search Filter Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy This issue
BSAC Journals Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Infectious Diseases
Medical Microbiology and Virology Books Journals Oxford Academic Enter
search term Search

Journal Article


# Infection with the frequently transmitted HIV-1 M41L variant has no influence on selection of tenofovir resistance

Marieke Pingen

,

Monique Nijhuis

,

Tania Mudrikova

,

Arjan van Laarhoven

,

Nienke Langebeek

,

Clemens Richter

,

Charles A. B. Boucher

,

Annemarie M. J. Wensing

*Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy* , Volume 70, Issue 2, February
2015, Pages 573--580, https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dku377

Published:

26 September 2014

Article history

-    PDF

-    Split View

-

-
Cite

-

* Permissions Icon * Permissions

-   * Share Icon * Share


##

Objectives

In ∼10% of newly diagnosed HIV-1 patients, drug-resistant viral variants
are detected. In such transmitted HIV-1 variants, the thymidine analogue
mutation (TAM) M41L is frequently observed as a single resistance
mutation and these viral variants often belong to phylogenetic
transmission clusters. The presence of at least three TAMs, in
particular patterns with M41L/L210W, impairs the efficacy of the
extensively used drug tenofovir. We investigated whether the presence of
a single M41L mutation at baseline influences the selection of
resistance to tenofovir and emtricitabine *in vitro* and *in vivo* .

Methods

The impact of M41L on the development of drug resistance to tenofovir
and emtricitabine was determined by extensive *in vitro* selection
experiments and investigation of the virological outcome of patients on
a first-line regimen.

Results

The presence of a single M41L mutation did not influence the selected
mutational profile or the genetic barrier to resistance to tenofovir
and/or emtricitabine during long-term *in vitro* selection experiments.
*In vivo* , virological outcome of first-line regimens containing
tenofovir and emtricitabine was comparable between patients diagnosed
with HIV-1 harbouring M41L ( *n* = 17, 16 were part of one transmission
cluster) and WT virus ( *n* = 248).

Conclusions

Detection of a single M41L reverse transcriptase mutation at baseline
did not influence the development of resistance *in vitro* or
virological outcome on tenofovir-containing regimens in patients
belonging to a large transmission cluster. Our results indicate that a
high genetic barrier regimen may not be required when patients are
diagnosed with HIV variants containing a single M41L mutation in reverse
transcriptase.

transmission , drug resistance , emtricitabine , Truvada ^®^ , Atripla
^®^

Topic:

-    hiv
-    mutation
-    hiv-1
-    rna-directed dna polymerase
-    thymidine
-    infections
-    genetics
-    virology
-    viruses
-    tenofovir
-    emtricitabine
-    drug development
-    tenofovir/emtricitabine

Issue Section:

ORIGINAL RESEARCH


## Introduction

Approximately 10% of all newly diagnosed HIV-1 patients in Europe and
the USA present with drug-resistant HIV-1, often harbouring only one
drug resistance mutation. ^\ \ 1\ --\ \ \ 3^ Such viral variants can be
derived from patients experiencing therapy failure, in whom extensive
drug resistance profiles are regularly observed. ^\ \ 4^ After
transmission of these drug-resistant HIV-1 variants, improvement of
replication capacity can drive (partial) reversion of the resistance
profile. ^\ \ 5^ Meanwhile, the originally transmitted, more extensively
resistant variant is archived and may potentially re-emerge after
treatment initiation. Alternatively, drug-resistant HIV-1 variants may
be found in untreated patients who themselves are infected with these
variants by onward transmission. ^\ \ 6\ ,\ \ \ 7^ In these patients,
the risk of archived extensively drug-resistant HIV variants is limited.
^\ \ 8^

Therefore, insight into the source of transmitted drug-resistant HIV-1
variants may help to distinguish between patients with and without
archived extensively drug-resistant HIV variants that are not detected
at the moment of diagnosis but may endanger therapy efficacy.
Phylogenetic analysis may provide relevant insights regarding
transmission networks and such onward transmission of drug-resistant
HIV-1. ^\ \ 8\ ,\ \ \ 9^

Among patients diagnosed with drug-resistant HIV-1, the reverse
transcriptase (RT) M41L mutation is one of the most frequently observed
transmitted resistance mutations with a prevalence of 20%--31%.
^\ \ 1\ --\ \ \ 3^ M41L belongs to the group of thymidine analogue
mutations (TAMs) (M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F and K219E/Q) that are
selected by the NRTIs zidovudine and stavudine, which have been used
extensively in the past. ^\ \ 10\ ,\ \ \ 11^ TAMs not only decrease
susceptibility to zidovudine and stavudine, but also lead to
cross-resistance to other NRTIs such as tenofovir. Clinical studies have
shown that the presence of three or more TAMs, in particular patterns
with M41L or L210W, impairs the virological efficacy of tenofovir.
^\ \ 12\ --\ \ \ 14^ In patients infected with WT virus, TAMs are rarely
observed upon virological failure of tenofovir-containing first-line
regimens. If resistance to tenofovir is selected in these cases,
mutations K65R and/or K70E are primarily detected. ^\ \ 15\ --\ \ \ 19^

Little is known about the biological and clinical consequences of
transmitted HIV variants with a single M41L in relation to the use of
tenofovir. The presence of a single M41L does not lead to an evidently
decreased susceptibility to tenofovir *in vitro.* ^\ \ 20^ However, it
remains unknown whether the presence of M41L decreases the genetic
barrier to resistance or skews the resistance pathway towards
accumulation of TAMs in case of virological failure. The tenofovir and
emtricitabine coformulation Truvada ^®^ is the most frequently used
first-line NRTI backbone in clinical practice and is often combined with
low genetic barrier drugs such as efavirenz, nevirapine or raltegravir.
Concerns for rapid selection of TAMs or the presence of more extensively
drug-resistant HIV-1 variants in the quasispecies may result in the
choice of more complex initial regimens with a higher genetic barrier.
However, complex regimens often lead to an increased pill burden,
elevated costs and may also increase toxicity. Insight into the effect
of M41L at baseline on the selection of resistance by
tenofovir/emtricitabine may ease first-line treatment choices for
patients. Furthermore, as tenofovir/emtricitabine is also used for
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent HIV-1 transmission in
high-risk individuals, it is essential to gain insight into whether the
efficacy of tenofovir/emtricitabine PrEP could be affected by
circulating viruses with the M41L mutation. We investigated the impact
of a single M41L at baseline by studying the selection of drug
resistance to tenofovir and/or emtricitabine *in vitro* and therapy
response *in vivo* .


## Methods

### Virus panel

To compare *in vitro* development of drug resistance to tenofovir and
emtricitabine, three subtype B M41L viruses were generated: two
patient-derived M41L viruses (pM41L-1 and -2) and a site-directed mutant
(SDM-M41L). The clinical isolate resulting in pM41L-1 was selected from
a large transmission cluster. To ensure results were not specific for
the genetic background within that particular cluster, a second isolate
with a single M41L that did not cluster was chosen resulting in pM41L-2
(data not shown, for methods see below in the Phylogenetic analysis
section). The N-terminus of RT (amino acids 25--314) of both
patient-derived viruses was amplified, digested and ligated using the
previously described NRT vector system. ^\ \ 21^ The M41L mutation was
introduced by site-directed mutagenesis into WT HXB2 (primer M41L-RT:
5′-ATT TGT ACA GAG CTG GAA AAG GAA G-3′, nucleotides 2658--2682) using
the aforementioned vector system. Clones were verified by sequence
analysis. Virus stocks were obtained by transfection of HEK293T cells
with plasmid DNA using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer\'s protocol. The TCID ~50~ was determined by endpoint
dilution in MT2 cells (baseline viruses) or SupT1 cells ( *in vitro*
selection viruses).

### In vitro drug selection and evolution

A chequerboard approach was used to determine the drug concentration of
tenofovir in combination with emtricitabine. SupT1 cells were inoculated
with WT (HXB2) at an moi of 0.001 for 2 h before a range of
emtricitabine (0--0.9 μM) and tenofovir (0--2.0 μM) concentrations were
added. Cells were monitored regularly for CPE. Twice a week, half of the
culture was replaced by culture medium with the same drug
concentrations. The highest drug concentrations of the cultures in which
CPE developed after 2 weeks were used in the first passage of the *in
vitro* selection experiments. The initial emtricitabine concentration in
the *in vitro* selection experiments of 0.011 μM emtricitabine was below
the 50% effective concentration (EC ~50~ ) in SupT1 cells, while the
initial tenofovir concentration of 2 μM tenofovir was above the EC ~50~
.

*In vitro* selections were started in parallel 5-fold cultures in which
2 × 10 ^5^ SupT1 cells were infected with an moi of 0.001. The initial
drug concentration was 0.011 μM emtricitabine, 4 μM tenofovir or 0.011
μM emtricitabine + 2 μM tenofovir. Cultures were regularly monitored for
CPE and replenished twice a week with fresh culture medium supplemented
with drug(s). When full-blown CPE was observed, cell-free supernatant
was harvested and stored at −80°C. Subsequent passages were started by
infecting 2 × 10 ^5^ SupT1 cells with 10--50 μL of virus of the previous
passage. Drug concentrations were gradually increased to 0.352 μM
emtricitabine, 32 μM tenofovir or 0.132 μM emtricitabine + 24 μM
tenofovir. After five (tenofovir and tenofovir + emtricitabine) or six
passages (emtricitabine), viral RNA was isolated for genotypic analysis
of the entire RT gene. Increased drug levels of tenofovir and/or
emtricitabine repeatedly inhibited viral replication in several of the
WT and M41L cultures, which were therefore discontinued.

### Phenotypic drug susceptibility

Viruses resulting from the *in vitro* selection experiments were
expanded by infecting 2 × 10 ^6^ SupT1 cells in the absence of drugs.
The *in vitro* drug susceptibility of the virus panel was determined
using a multiple cycle assay. ^\ \ 22^ Resistance was defined as the
fold increase in EC ~50~ compared with the WT laboratory strain HXB2. At
least two independent experiments were performed to calculate phenotypic
drug resistance. The susceptibility of all viruses with a single M41L to
tenofovir and emtricitabine was comparable to WT virus (tenofovir EC
~50~ : 1.9 μM, emtricitabine EC ~50~ : 1.6 μM in MT2 cells)
Supplementary Data .

### Study population

We investigated individuals who were newly diagnosed with HIV-1 in two
centres in the Netherlands: University Medical Center Utrecht and
Rijnstate Hospital in Arnhem. All patients were participants of the
Dutch ATHENA Cohort, which has been approved by the local and national
institutional review boards. Inclusion criteria were as follows: (i)
baseline genotypic resistance test generated between 2007 and 2010; (ii)
initiation of first-line therapy with a
tenofovir/emtricitabine-containing regimen; (iii) ≥1 year of clinical
follow-up after therapy initiation; and (iv) detection of WT virus or a
variant harbouring M41L as the only resistance mutation according to the
IAS-USA list of resistance mutations. ^\ \ 23^ Virus subtypes were
determined using REGAv3. ^\ \ 24^

### Clinical outcome

Low genetic barrier ART regimens were defined as tenofovir/emtricitabine
with an NNRTI or raltegravir as a third drug. Regimens that contained
either a boosted protease inhibitor or more than three drugs were
classified as high genetic barrier regimens. Virological failure during
the first year of treatment was defined as follows: (i) not achieving
HIV RNA \<50 copies/mL; or (ii) HIV RNA \>200 copies/mL after achieving
HIV RNA \<50 copies/mL. The analyses were conducted on an
intent-to-treat basis. Statistical analysis was conducted using
Fisher\'s exact test (categorical data) or the Mann--Whitney *U* -test
(numerical data) in SPSS Statistics 19 (IBM).

### Phylogenetic analysis

Baseline population sequences of the HIV *pol* gene from all patients
included in the cohort analysis were aligned using ClustalW. To avoid
bias caused by the presence of M41L, amino acid position 41 in RT was
removed from the alignment. A maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree was
calculated with MEGA 5.2.1 using the general time-reversing model of
nucleotide substitution with Γ-distributed rate heterogeneity with 1000
bootstrap replicates.


## Results

### Impact of M41L on in vitro selection of resistance to tenofovir and emtricitabine

To assess the impact of the M41L mutation on the acquisition of
resistance to tenofovir and emtricitabine, extensive *in vitro*
selection experiments were performed. We compared WT virus HXB2, a
site-directed mutant with M41L in the genetic background of HXB2
(SDM-M41L) and two patient-derived viruses containing M41L as the only
major resistance-related mutation (pM41L-1 and -2). One patient-derived
virus, pM41L-1, was selected as a representative virus from a large
transmission cluster (Figure 1 ). A second, genetically distinct
patient-derived virus, pM41L-2, did not cluster with any known sequence
(data not shown).

Figure 1.

Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of baseline sequences. The first
available sequence of all patients included in the cohort analysis ( *n*
= 265) was used to calculate a maximum-likelihood tree. Sequences from
patients from Utrecht Medical Center are indicated with triangles and
sequences from patients from Rijnstate Hospital are indicated with
circles. WT sequences are indicated with open symbols and sequences
harbouring M41L in RT are indicated with filled symbols. The arrow
indicates the virus used for pM41L-1.

Open in new tab Download slide

During these experiments, the drug pressure was gradually increased and
comparable selection rates were observed for WT and SDM-M41L (data not
shown), suggesting that M41L does not affect the rate of selection of
resistance mutations against tenofovir and emtricitabine. After five or
six passages, the entire RT gene was sequenced to investigate the
selected resistance profile.

Under tenofovir pressure alone (Table 1 , Supplementary Data ), the M41L
mutation persisted in 5 out of 6 cultures, while no TAMs were selected.
For WT virus as well as M41L-containing viruses, the dominantly selected
resistance profile was K65R. The single presence of K65R in WT virus
background resulted in a 21-fold increase in the EC ~50~ of tenofovir
compared with WT virus and a 12- to 15-fold increase when K65R appeared
in the background of M41L. D67G was selected by two M41L-containing
viruses: once solitary and once accompanied by K65R. The combination of
M41L and D67G resulted in a 4-fold increase in the EC ~50~ of tenofovir.

Table 1.

Resistance patterns and drug susceptibility after *in vitro* selections

.

WT (number of cultures) .

Fold increase in EC ~50~ compared with WT HIV .

M41L (number of cultures) .

Fold increase in EC ~50~ compared with WT HIV .

TFV

K65R (2/2)

21×

K65R (5/6)

12--15×

D67G (2/6)

4×

FTC

M184I/V (4/5)

120 to \>300×

M184I/V/T (11/12)

65 to \>300×

K65R (1/5)

21×

K65R (1/12)

10--20×

D67G (1/5)

ND

D67G (1/2)

5×

TFV + FTC

^a^

K65R (4/4)

ND

TFV, tenofovir; FTC, emtricitabine; ND, not determined.

The fold change in EC ~50~ compared with WT virus was determined in at
least two independent experiments. More extensive susceptibility data
can be found in Supplementary Data .

^a^ As we were unable to propagate WT virus in the presence of a
combination of TFV and FTC, no data available.

Table 1.

Resistance patterns and drug susceptibility after *in vitro* selections

.

WT (number of cultures) .

Fold increase in EC ~50~ compared with WT HIV .

M41L (number of cultures) .

Fold increase in EC ~50~ compared with WT HIV .

TFV

K65R (2/2)

21×

K65R (5/6)

12--15×

D67G (2/6)

4×

FTC

M184I/V (4/5)

120 to \>300×

M184I/V/T (11/12)

65 to \>300×

K65R (1/5)

21×

K65R (1/12)

10--20×

D67G (1/5)

ND

D67G (1/2)

5×

TFV + FTC

^a^

K65R (4/4)

ND

TFV, tenofovir; FTC, emtricitabine; ND, not determined.

The fold change in EC ~50~ compared with WT virus was determined in at
least two independent experiments. More extensive susceptibility data
can be found in Supplementary Data .

^a^ As we were unable to propagate WT virus in the presence of a
combination of TFV and FTC, no data available.

Under single emtricitabine pressure (Table 1 , Supplementary Data ),
M41L persisted in all cultures and no selection of TAMs was observed.
Again, the resistance patterns of WT and M41L-containing viruses were
very similar. In the majority of cultures (15/17), mutations at position
184 were selected. M184V conferred a very high increase in the EC ~50~
of emtricitabine (\>300-fold) independently of the presence of M41L. The
average increase in the EC ~50~ of emtricitabine for a virus harbouring
M184I was 120-fold. In two cultures, K65R was selected: once as the only
mutation in WT background and once in combination with M184V by pM41L-2.
The effect of a single K65R on the fold change in the EC ~50~ of
emtricitabine was comparable in the absence and presence of M41L (19- to
21-fold for WT virus and SDM-M41L).

Although all viruses were able to replicate under tenofovir pressure in
combination with emtricitabine during initial passages, viral
replication was completely inhibited in the majority of cultures during
later passages. Only four cultures could be successfully propagated
under high drug pressure and in all four experiments K65R was selected
(Table 1 and Supplementary Data ).

### In vitro evolution of M41L variants

To ensure that the observed selection of drug resistance mutations was
specifically caused by the selective drug pressure of tenofovir and/or
emtricitabine, all viruses were propagated in 5-fold for 10 passages in
the absence of drugs ( Supplementary Data ). This revealed persistence
of M41L in all cultures for 10 passages. No additional
resistance-related mutations were selected in any of these cultures.
Interestingly, in all cultures changes were observed at polymorphic
positions. Selection of additional polymorphisms may be a result of
adaptation to *in vitro* culture in a T cell line, the absence of
immunological pressure or can be related to restoration of the viral
replicative capacity. Indeed, position 162 in RT has been described to
have a compensatory role increasing the replicative capacity of viruses
harbouring M41L. ^\ \ 25^ Both patient-derived viruses had a
polymorphism at position 162 and changes at this position were observed
in 4/13 cultures ( Supplementary Data ).

### Impact of M41L on first-line treatment with tenofovir and emtricitabine

To investigate the possible influence of M41L on the efficacy of
tenofovir/emtricitabine-based therapy, we compared the therapy outcome
of patients diagnosed with an HIV-1 M41L variant with patients
harbouring WT HIV-1. All patients from two centres in the Netherlands
(University Medical Center Utrecht and Rijnstate Hospital in Arnhem)
from whom a baseline genotypic analysis was performed between 2007 and
2010 were enrolled in this study. Of 530 patients, 279 initiated
tenofovir/emtricitabine-containing first-line regimens and had ≥1 year
of clinical follow-up. Of these, 31 patients were diagnosed with
drug-resistant HIV-1, of which 17 patients had a variant harbouring only
M41L. The remaining 248 patients were diagnosed with WT virus. The
latter two groups were included in the analysis (Figure 2 ).

Figure 2.

Inclusion of patients and clinical outcome of cohort analysis. TFV,
tenofovir; M41L, variant harbouring M41L as only resistance mutation;
LGB, low genetic barrier regimen (tenofovir and emtricitabine with
efavirenz, nevirapine or raltegravir); HGB, high genetic barrier regimen
(tenofovir and emtricitabine with a boosted protease inhibitor or
regimens containing more than three drugs); VF, virological failure.

Open in new tab Download slide

### Baseline characteristics of included patients

Of the 265 included patients, 90% were male. The main transmission route
was MSM (72%). Most patients were infected with HIV-1 subtype B (80%).
At baseline, the median CD4 count was 290 cells/mm ^3^ and median log
plasma HIV RNA was 5.1 copies/mL. Except for a slightly higher HIV RNA
(5.5 versus 5.1, *P* = 0.033), the baseline characteristics of patients
diagnosed with an M41L variant were comparable to patients with a WT
virus (Table 2 ).

Table 2.

Baseline patient characteristics

.

Total, *n* = 265 .

WT, *n* = 248 .

M41L, *n* = 17 .

*P* value .

Age (years), median (IQR)

39.6 (31.6--47.8)

39.6 (31.2--48.4)

39.4 (28.9--43.9)

0.353

Male, *n* (%)

238 (89.8)

221 (89.1)

17 (100)

0.232

Transmission route, *n* (%)

MSM

190 (71.7)

173 (69.8)

17 (100)

0.004 ^a^

heterosexual

58 (21.5)

58 (23.4)

0 (0)

other/unknown

17 (6.4)

17 (6.9)

0 (0)

Subtype B, *n* (%)

213 (80.4)

197 (79.4)

16 (94.1)

0.208 ^b^

CD4 cell count (cells/mm ^3^ ), median (IQR)

290 (150--422)

289 (149--423)

337 (151--397)

0.405

Plasma HIV RNA (log copies/mL), median (IQR)

5.1 (4.8--5.6)

5.1 (4.8--5.5)

5.5 (5.0--5.9)

0.033

The *P* value was calculated for characteristics of patients diagnosed
with WT versus M41L variant using Fisher\'s exact test (categorical
data) or Mann--Whitney *U* -test (numerical data).

^a^ *P* value for route of transmission was calculated as MSM versus
non-MSM due to small patient numbers.

^b^ *P* value for subtype was calculated as subtype B versus non-B due
to small patient numbers.

Table 2.

Baseline patient characteristics

.

Total, *n* = 265 .

WT, *n* = 248 .

M41L, *n* = 17 .

*P* value .

Age (years), median (IQR)

39.6 (31.6--47.8)

39.6 (31.2--48.4)

39.4 (28.9--43.9)

0.353

Male, *n* (%)

238 (89.8)

221 (89.1)

17 (100)

0.232

Transmission route, *n* (%)

MSM

190 (71.7)

173 (69.8)

17 (100)

0.004 ^a^

heterosexual

58 (21.5)

58 (23.4)

0 (0)

other/unknown

17 (6.4)

17 (6.9)

0 (0)

Subtype B, *n* (%)

213 (80.4)

197 (79.4)

16 (94.1)

0.208 ^b^

CD4 cell count (cells/mm ^3^ ), median (IQR)

290 (150--422)

289 (149--423)

337 (151--397)

0.405

Plasma HIV RNA (log copies/mL), median (IQR)

5.1 (4.8--5.6)

5.1 (4.8--5.5)

5.5 (5.0--5.9)

0.033

The *P* value was calculated for characteristics of patients diagnosed
with WT versus M41L variant using Fisher\'s exact test (categorical
data) or Mann--Whitney *U* -test (numerical data).

^a^ *P* value for route of transmission was calculated as MSM versus
non-MSM due to small patient numbers.

^b^ *P* value for subtype was calculated as subtype B versus non-B due
to small patient numbers.

Phylogenetic analysis of the viral sequences isolated from all included
patients ( *n* = 265) revealed that 16/17 variants harbouring M41L
belonged to a large transmission cluster (bootstrap value 98%). This
indicates that these patients are part of a transmission network with
circulating HIV variants harbouring M41L as a single drug resistance
mutation. These 16 clustering viruses belonged to HIV-1 subtype B,
whereas the non-clustering virus was subtype C. Although the two
participating centres are located in distinct geographic regions of the
Netherlands, viruses from both centres frequently clustered, indicating
highly interlacing epidemics (Figure 1 ).

### Clinical impact of transmitted HIV-1 variants harbouring M41L

The majority of included patients who initiated a
tenofovir/emtricitabine-containing therapy continued the initial
first-line regimen during follow-up. Only 23/265 patients (8.7%)
(temporarily) stopped tenofovir/emtricitabine treatment or switched to
other NRTIs, mainly due to toxicity ( *n* = 7) or because the patient
decided to discontinue treatment ( *n* = 6). The presence of M41L, if
known at the time of therapy selection, regularly shifted therapy choice
towards a higher genetic barrier regimen. Indeed, a comparison of
initial therapy regimens revealed that patients diagnosed with an M41L
variant received a high genetic barrier regimen significantly more often
than patients diagnosed with WT virus \[11/17 (64.7%) versus 98/248
(39.5%), Fisher\'s exact test: *P* = 0.044\].

The rate of virological failure during the first year of treatment was
comparable between patients diagnosed with an M41L variant or WT virus
\[1/17 (5.9%) versus 12/236 (5.1%), *P* = 0.586\]. Interestingly, none
of the patients diagnosed with M41L variants who initiated a low genetic
barrier regimen experienced virological failure, which was not
statistically different from patients infected with WT virus on a low
genetic barrier regimen \[0/6 (0.0%) versus 7/150 (4.7%), *P* = 1.000\].
In the single patient infected with an M41L variant who experienced
therapy failure on a high genetic barrier regimen consisting of
tenofovir, emtricitabine and ritonavir-boosted atazanavir, resistance
testing did not reveal selection of additional NRTI mutations. For 7 of
the 12 patients diagnosed with WT virus, genotypic resistance analysis
was successfully performed during virological failure, which revealed no
selection of TAMs, K65R or K70E. In one patient who received a high
genetic barrier regimen, an NRTI mutation (M184V) was selected. In
another patient treated with a low genetic barrier regimen, the
NNRTI-related mutations K103KN and V106MV were detected in absence of
M184V.


## Discussion

This study investigated the impact of the frequently transmitted M41L
mutation on the development of drug resistance during exposure to
tenofovir and emtricitabine. The presence of M41L did not affect the
selected mutational profile under drug pressure with tenofovir and/or
emtricitabine *in vitro* . Furthermore, patients diagnosed with HIV-1
harbouring M41L who belonged to a large transmission network had an
excellent virological response after 1 year of ART containing
tenofovir/emtricitabine, even when treated with a low genetic barrier
regimen.

Selection of resistance to tenofovir and emtricitabine in WT HIV-1 was
previously characterized by Margot *et al.* ^\ \ 18^ This study showed
that *in vitro* selection of resistance to tenofovir/emtricitabine
mainly selected for K65R and at high drug concentrations M184V was
selected additionally. ^\ \ 18^ This is in agreement with our study, in
which WT virus selected for K65R. Our main focus was to explore the
impact of a single M41L mutation on the selection of drug resistance *in
vitro* . We demonstrated for the first time that, similar to HIV WT,
viruses harbouring M41L mainly selected the mutations K65R or M184V/I
during *in vitro* pressure of tenofovir or emtricitabine, while no TAMs
were selected in any culture.

Besides selection of K65R, both tenofovir and emtricitabine selected for
D67G in several cultures. Although D67G has not been described to be
selected *in vitro* , *in vivo* this atypical mutation at a TAM position
is selected occasionally in patients treated with tenofovir and/or
emtricitabine. ^\ \ 26^ *In vitro* , the combination of M41L and D67G
resulted in a 4-fold increase in the EC ~50~ of both tenofovir and
emtricitabine, indicating this mutation may contribute to low-level drug
resistance in clinical practice.

Previous research has focused on viruses containing complex TAM profiles
because these were frequently observed in patients experiencing
virological failure on thymidine analogues. In contrast, we focused on
variants harbouring a single M41L as this is the most frequently
observed mutation in baseline genotypes of newly diagnosed patients
^\ \ 1\ --\ \ \ 3^ and the influence of this frequently transmitted
variant had not been elucidated.

It was previously observed that the presence of a complex TAM profile
was negatively associated with the presence of K65R.
^\ \ 27\ --\ \ \ 29^ Indeed, single-genome sequencing demonstrated that
TAM profiles were rarely observed on the same viral genome as K65R,
implying a detrimental impact of this combination of mutations. ^\ \ 30^
Interestingly, in our experiments the presence of a single M41L did not
prevent the selection of K65R, as we observed similar rates of selection
of K65R for HIV with and without M41L. It has been shown that the
presence of multiple TAMs decreases the ability of K65R to discriminate
between NRTIs and the natural nucleoside, resulting in a decreased level
of resistance. ^\ \ 31^ In line with that study, our data indicate that
the presence of a single M41L also decreases the level of resistance to
tenofovir caused by K65R (Table 1 and Supplementary Data ).

Recent evidence indicates that resistance or compensatory mutations
related to TAMs or M184 variants can also be selected in the connection
domain and RNaseH. ^\ \ 32\ ,\ \ \ 33^ Therefore, a possible limitation
of this study is that only the N-terminus of RT was used for the
generation of patient-derived viruses. However, sequence analysis of the
entire RT gene revealed that mutations were selected in the C-terminus
in only a minority of the cultures and no mutations described to be
associated with therapy were observed. ^\ \ 32^

In addition to the extensive *in vitro* experiments, we investigated the
impact of HIV M41L on therapy outcome. In our cohort of 265 patients, 17
patients were diagnosed with an HIV-1 variant harbouring a single M41L
mutation, of whom 16 belonged to a large phylogenetic cluster.
Phylogenetic clustering is indicative of circulation of HIV-1 within a
transmission network and limits the risk of initial transmission of a
more extensively resistant HIV that reverted in plasma.

Although these are relatively small numbers, this is, to our knowledge,
the largest group of patients described with a similar transmitted
mutation for whom outcome data are available. Of these 17 patients, 16
achieved and maintained a suppressed HIV RNA during the first year of
therapy, which is similar to the virological outcome of patients
infected with WT virus. A potential limitation is that the viruses of
patients diagnosed with HIV M41L variant have a limited genetic
diversity. However, this particular variant is often encountered in
clinical practice in several countries. ^\ \ 25\ ,\ \ \ 34^ Moreover,
none of the three genetically distinct M41L-containing HIV-1 variants in
our extensive *in vitro* experiments selected for any TAMs. Combined,
these observations suggest that our results are broadly applicable.

Our findings suggest that a tenofovir/emtricitabine-containing regimen
can be efficacious for treatment of HIV variants harbouring a single
M41L mutation, especially when phylogenetic analysis indicates that the
virus belongs to a transmission cluster.

Our data have important clinical implications. Our *in vitro* and
clinical data demonstrate that low genetic barrier regimens may be
effective in treating patients diagnosed with a single M41L. This is
especially true when the presence of additional TAMs in the quasispecies
is unlikely based on clinical or phylogenetic evidence. Additionally,
M41L did not skew the virus towards selection of multiple TAMs. This
suggests that the presence of a single M41L does not affect the genetic
barrier towards selection of resistance to tenofovir and/or
emtricitabine. Furthermore, our data indicate that the presence of a
single M41L does not affect the efficacy of tenofovir/emtricitabine as
PrEP or impact the potential selection of additional resistance
mutations under PrEP. Taken together, these results suggest that
initiation of a high genetic barrier regimen may not be required when
patients are infected with a drug-resistant strain containing M41L as
the only drug resistance mutation.


## Funding

This work was supported by the Aids Fonds Netherlands (grant number
2007034), the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO VIDI
grant 91796349) and the European Commission (grant number
LSHP-CT-2006-518211).


## Transparency declarations

None to declare.

### Author contributions

A. M. J. W. and M. N. designed the study and laboratory experiments. C.
A. B. B. was involved in the study design. M. P. conducted the
experiments and the majority of the analyses. A. v. L. was involved in
the analysis and database management. T. M., N. L. and C. R. were
responsible for the clinical data and the interpretation of these data
in the study. A. M. J. W., M. N. and M. P. wrote the manuscript and the
other authors contributed to the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.


## Acknowledgements

These data were presented in part at the International Workshop on HIV &
Hepatitis Virus Drug Resistance and Curative Strategies, Los Cabos,
Mexico, 2011 (Abstract A63) and the Sixth International Workshop on HIV
Transmission, Rome, Italy (Abstract O_17).

We would like to thank Dorien de Jong and Pascal Mantiri for excellent
technical support, Justin E. Swartz for assistance in analysis and Susan
C. Aitken for critical reading of the manuscript prior to submission.


## Supplementary data

Supplementary Data  - zip file

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

### Citations

8

CITATIONS

### Views

868

### Altmetric

More metrics information

### Email alerts

Article activity alert

Advance article alerts

New issue alert

Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic

### Recommended

1.  Impact of NRTI resistance mutations on virological effectiveness of
antiretroviral regimens containing elvitegravir: a multi-cohort
study

Sara Modica et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 2019

2.  The use of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for the treatment of
nucleoside-resistant HIV-1

Damian J. McColl et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 2003

3.  Virological outcomes of boosted protease inhibitor-based first-line
ART in subjects harbouring thymidine analogue-associated mutations
as the sole form of transmitted drug resistance

Anna Maria Geretti et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
2018

1.  Strength in Numbers or Collective Frailty? The Organizational
Capacity of Microenterprises

Steven Samford, Sociology of Development

2.  Toward Global Urban Climate MitigationLinking National and
Polycentric Systems of Environmental Change

Benjamin Leffel, Sociology of Development

3.  Development and Gender-Linked Economic Inequality in the Era of
Globalization

Semyonov et al., Sociology of Development, 2018

Powered by

### Citing articles via

Web of Science (8)

Google Scholar

-   ### Latest

-   ### Most Read

-   ### Most Cited

Professor Alasdair Macintosh Geddes, 14 May 1934--9 April 2024

Imipenem reduces the efficacy of vancomycin against *Elizabethkingia*
species

Implication of genotypes for prognosis of *Candida glabrata* bloodstream
infections

Characterization of a case of virological failure after switch to
long-acting cabotegravir and rilpivirine

The novel 2024 WHO *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* reference strains for global
quality assurance of laboratory investigations and superseded WHO *N.
gonorrhoeae* reference strains---phenotypic, genetic and reference
genome characterization

More from Oxford Academic

Clinical Medicine

Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics

Infectious Diseases

Medical Microbiology and Virology

Medicine and Health

Pathology

Books

Journals

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

close advertisement

-   About Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
-   Editorial Board
-   Author Guidelines
-   Contact BSAC
-   Facebook

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Twitter
-   Purchase
-   Recommend to your Library
-   Advertising and Corporate Services
-   Journals Career Network

-   Online ISSN 1460-2091
-   Print ISSN 0305-7453
-   Copyright © 2024 British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy

-   About Oxford Academic
-   Publish journals with us
-   University press partners
-   What we publish
-   New features

-   Authoring
-   Open access
-   Purchasing
-   Institutional account management
-   Rights and permissions

-   Get help with access
-   Accessibility
-   Contact us
-   Advertising
-   Media enquiries

-   Oxford University Press
-   News
-   Oxford Languages
-   University of Oxford

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It
furthers the University\'s objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide

-   Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press
-   Cookie settings
-   Cookie policy
-   Privacy policy
-   Legal notice

PDF Help


**Figure 1 not found**

**Figure 2 not found**



## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Table 2

**Table 2 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th>    .   </th><th>    WT (number of cultures)    .   </th><th>    Fold increase in EC    <sub>     50    </sub>    compared with WT HIV    .   </th><th>    M41L (number of cultures)    .   </th><th>    Fold increase in EC    <sub>     50    </sub>    compared with WT HIV    .   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   TFV  </td><td>   K65R (2/2)  </td><td>   21×  </td><td>   K65R (5/6)  </td><td>   12–15×  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   D67G (2/6)  </td><td>   4×  </td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">   FTC  </td><td>   M184I/V (4/5)  </td><td>   120 to &gt;300×  </td><td>   M184I/V/T (11/12)  </td><td>   65 to &gt;300×  </td></tr><tr><td>   K65R (1/5)  </td><td>   21×  </td><td>   K65R (1/12)  </td><td>   10–20×  </td></tr><tr><td>   D67G (1/5)  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   D67G (1/2)  </td><td>   5×  </td></tr><tr><td>   TFV + FTC  </td><td><sup>    a   </sup></td><td></td><td>   K65R (4/4)  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th>    .   </th><th>    WT (number of cultures)    .   </th><th>    Fold increase in EC    <sub>     50    </sub>    compared with WT HIV    .   </th><th>    M41L (number of cultures)    .   </th><th>    Fold increase in EC    <sub>     50    </sub>    compared with WT HIV    .   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   TFV  </td><td>   K65R (2/2)  </td><td>   21×  </td><td>   K65R (5/6)  </td><td>   12–15×  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   D67G (2/6)  </td><td>   4×  </td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">   FTC  </td><td>   M184I/V (4/5)  </td><td>   120 to &gt;300×  </td><td>   M184I/V/T (11/12)  </td><td>   65 to &gt;300×  </td></tr><tr><td>   K65R (1/5)  </td><td>   21×  </td><td>   K65R (1/12)  </td><td>   10–20×  </td></tr><tr><td>   D67G (1/5)  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   D67G (1/2)  </td><td>   5×  </td></tr><tr><td>   TFV + FTC  </td><td><sup>    a   </sup></td><td></td><td>   K65R (4/4)  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 2

<table><thead><tr><th>    .   </th><th>    Total,    n    = 265    .   </th><th>    WT,    n    = 248    .   </th><th>    M41L,    n    = 17    .   </th><th>    P    value    .   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Age (years), median (IQR)  </td><td>   39.6 (31.6–47.8)  </td><td>   39.6 (31.2–48.4)  </td><td>   39.4 (28.9–43.9)  </td><td>   0.353  </td></tr><tr><td>   Male,   n   (%)  </td><td>   238 (89.8)  </td><td>   221 (89.1)  </td><td>   17 (100)  </td><td>   0.232  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">   Transmission route,   n   (%)  </td></tr><tr><td>   MSM  </td><td>   190 (71.7)  </td><td>   173 (69.8)  </td><td>   17 (100)  </td><td>   0.004   <sup>    a   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   heterosexual  </td><td>   58 (21.5)  </td><td>   58 (23.4)  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   other/unknown  </td><td>   17 (6.4)  </td><td>   17 (6.9)  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   Subtype B,   n   (%)  </td><td>   213 (80.4)  </td><td>   197 (79.4)  </td><td>   16 (94.1)  </td><td>   0.208   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   CD4 cell count (cells/mm   <sup>    3   </sup>   ), median (IQR)  </td><td>   290 (150–422)  </td><td>   289 (149–423)  </td><td>   337 (151–397)  </td><td>   0.405  </td></tr><tr><td>   Plasma HIV RNA (log copies/mL), median (IQR)  </td><td>   5.1 (4.8–5.6)  </td><td>   5.1 (4.8–5.5)  </td><td>   5.5 (5.0–5.9)  </td><td>   0.033  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 3

<table><thead><tr><th>    .   </th><th>    Total,    n    = 265    .   </th><th>    WT,    n    = 248    .   </th><th>    M41L,    n    = 17    .   </th><th>    P    value    .   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Age (years), median (IQR)  </td><td>   39.6 (31.6–47.8)  </td><td>   39.6 (31.2–48.4)  </td><td>   39.4 (28.9–43.9)  </td><td>   0.353  </td></tr><tr><td>   Male,   n   (%)  </td><td>   238 (89.8)  </td><td>   221 (89.1)  </td><td>   17 (100)  </td><td>   0.232  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">   Transmission route,   n   (%)  </td></tr><tr><td>   MSM  </td><td>   190 (71.7)  </td><td>   173 (69.8)  </td><td>   17 (100)  </td><td>   0.004   <sup>    a   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   heterosexual  </td><td>   58 (21.5)  </td><td>   58 (23.4)  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   other/unknown  </td><td>   17 (6.4)  </td><td>   17 (6.9)  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   Subtype B,   n   (%)  </td><td>   213 (80.4)  </td><td>   197 (79.4)  </td><td>   16 (94.1)  </td><td>   0.208   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   CD4 cell count (cells/mm   <sup>    3   </sup>   ), median (IQR)  </td><td>   290 (150–422)  </td><td>   289 (149–423)  </td><td>   337 (151–397)  </td><td>   0.405  </td></tr><tr><td>   Plasma HIV RNA (log copies/mL), median (IQR)  </td><td>   5.1 (4.8–5.6)  </td><td>   5.1 (4.8–5.5)  </td><td>   5.5 (5.0–5.9)  </td><td>   0.033  </td></tr></table>



