# Transmitted drug resistance in recently infected HIV-positive Individuals from four urban locations across Asia (2007--2010) -- TASER-S


## Abstract

### Background

The availability of HIV antiretroviral therapy (ART) has been associated
with the development of transmitted drug resistance-associated mutations
(TDRM). TDRM can compromise treatment effectiveness in patients
initiating ART and the prevalence can vary in different clinical
settings. In this study, we investigated the proportion of TDRM in
treatment-naïve, recently infected HIV-positive individuals sampled from
four urban locations across Asia between 2007--2010.

### Methods

Patients enrolled in the TREAT Asia Studies to Evaluate Resistance --
Surveillance Study (TASER-S) were genotyped prior to ART initiation,
with resulting resistance mutations analysed according to the WHO 2009
list.

### Results

Proportions of TDRM from recently infected individuals from TASER-S
ranged from 0% to 8.7% - Hong Kong: 3/88 (3.4%, 95% CI (0.71%-9.64%));
Thailand: Bangkok: 13/277 (4.7%, 95% CI (2.5%-7.9%)), Chiang Mai: 0/17
(0%, 97.5% CI (0%-19.5%)); and the Philippines: 6/69 (8.7%, 95% CI
(3.3%-18.0%)). There was no significant increase in TDRM over time
across all four clinical settings.

### Conclusions

The observed proportion of TDRM in TASER-S patients from Hong Kong,
Thailand and the Philippines was low to moderate during the study
period. Regular monitoring of TDRM should be encouraged, especially with
the scale-up of ART at higher CD4 levels.

**Keywords:** Transmitted, Drug resistance, Asia, Resource-limited,
Recent-infection

Go to:




## Methods

Treatment-naïve, recently HIV-infected patients were recruited into the
TREAT Asia Studies to Evaluate Resistance -- Surveillance Study
(TASER-S) between 2007-2010 \[ 7 \] from 5 participating sites: 2 from
Hong Kong SAR, China; 1 from Bangkok, Thailand; 1 from Chiang Mai,
Thailand; and 1 from Manila, Philippines. Patients were included in
TASER-S according to the following inclusion criteria:

***Hong Kong SAR, China:*** patients were selected from those who
attended the two participating clinics and satisfied one of these
criteria: (a) age up to 25 years old; (b) negative HIV test within one
year; or (c) BED assay positive.

***Bangkok, Thailand:*** patients were enrolled from a voluntary
counselling and testing centre in Bangkok. All modes of HIV exposure
were considered, however male patients with homosexual HIV exposure were
selectively chosen to be enrolled in 2010. Recent HIV infection was
defined as a new HIV diagnosis in subjects \<25 years old. For those who
were older, previous HIV-negative documentation within the past
12 months was required for study inclusion.

***Chiang Mai, Thailand:*** patients presented to care at the
participating hospital were selected for enrolment. Patients were
included if they had a confirmed HIV-positive test and were aged
\<25 years with no prior AIDS-defining illnesses.

***Manila, Philippines:*** blood samples were obtained from the STD AIDS
Cooperative Central Laboratory, the National Reference Laboratory for
HIV and Other STIs (NRL-SACCL). All samples obtained from asymptomatic
patients were tested using the BED assay. Those with positive BED tests
were presumed to be recently infected and included in TASER-S.

CD4 count was not used as a criteria in TASER-S as the study protocol
was developed prior to the WHO 2008 surveillance recommendations \[ 8
\], and it was not known a priori the time lag for obtaining CD4
results.

Genotyping was performed at TREAT Asia Quality Assessment Scheme (TAQAS)
certified laboratories \[ 9 \]. Pre-treatment *pol* gene FASTA files
were submitted to the Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database
\[ 10 \] Version 6.2 for genotyping and REGA HIV-1 Subtyping Tool \[ 11
, 12 \] - Version 2.0 for subtyping. RAMs were analysed according to the
WHO 2009 list \[ 13 \]. TDRM was defined as having ≥1 RAM. Patients with
both protease (PR) and reverse transcriptase (RT) sequences available
were included.

Clinical characteristics, including age, sex, mode of HIV exposure,
viral load, CD4 count and HIV-1 subtype, were reported descriptively.
Time trends were analysed using chi-squared test for trend. Confidence
intervals (CI) for proportion of RAMs were calculated using the exact
binomial methods. A sensitivity analysis was performed by including
patients who were missing a PR or RT sequence file by assuming an
absence of RAMs in the missing gene region and also by including those
with extensive RAMs without confirmation of their treatment naïve
status. All data management and statistical analyses were performed
using SAS software version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) and
STATA software version 12.1 (STATA Corp., College Station, TX, USA).

Data transfers were aggregated at The Kirby Institute, UNSW Australia.
Ethics approvals were obtained from UNSW Australia Ethics Committee and
institutional review boards at the participating clinical sites and
coordinating centre (TREAT Asia/amfAR, Bangkok, Thailand). Written
informed consent was obtained from participants prior to enrolment --
except in the Philippines, where anonymous samples were obtained from
the NRL-SACCL and consent was waived.

Go to:


## Results

### Hong Kong SAR, China

A total of 88 patients were included from the 2 sites (Table 1 ). The
overall proportion was 3/88 (3.4%, 95% CI (0.71%-9.64%)). Figure 1 shows
TDRM in 2007 was 0/28 (0.0%); 2008: 2/32 (6.3%); 2009: 1/21 (4.8%); and
2010: 0/7 (0.0%), p-trend = 0.631.



Table 2 shows a list of RAMs harboured by different individuals. Of the
3 patients with RAMs from Hong Kong, 1 patient had a PR RAM (M46I) and 2
patients had one RT RAM each (K103N and M41L).


### Bangkok, Thailand

Recruitment occurred between 2008--2010 with a total of 277 patients.
TDRM was present in 13/277 (4.7%, 95% CI (2.5%-7.9%)). The proportions
of TDRM by year were: 2008: 4/118 (3.4%); 2009: 4/83 (4.8%); and 2010:
5/76 (6.6%), p-trend = 0.305 (Figure 1 ). The most common PR-RAM was
M46I (6 patients) and the most common RT-RAM was Y181C (3 patients)
(Table 2 ).

### Chiang Mai, Thailand

Seventeen patients were enrolled into the study during the years 2007 (4
patients), 2008 (10 patients) and 2009 (3 patients). No patient
harboured RAMs, with 97.5% one-sided CI of (0%-19.5%).

### Manila, Philippines

Blood samples were collected from 69 patients. TDRM was present in 6/69
patients (8.7%, 95% CI (3.3%-18.0%)). Figure 1 shows in 2008, 0/1
patients (0.0%) had TDRM; 2009: 6/67 (9.0%); and 2010: 0/1 (0.0%),
p-trend \>0.999.

Out of the 6 patients who harboured RAMs, all but one harboured only one
resistance mutation (Table 2 ).

### Sensitivity analysis

With the inclusion of 5 patients with missing RT region and 3 patients
with extensive mutations from Bangkok, the total proportion of TDRM for
this site increased to 5.6% with 95% CI (3.2%-9.0%). The yearly trend of
TDRM was not significant at p = 0.256. For Manila, the inclusion of 13
patients with missing PR or RT sequences increased the proportion to
7/82 (8.5%, 95% CI (3.5%-16.8%)), p-trend = 0.860.

Go to:


## Discussion

Observed proportions of TDRM in this study ranged from 0% to 8.7%, with
no significant increase in trend over time. TASER-S participants were
predominantly men who have sex with men (MSM). Studies have shown that
MSM was associated with the presence of TDRM with higher rates of
resistance reported in this group \[ 5 , 14 \]. Although each TASER-S
site utilised a different recruitment strategy which prevents direct
comparison of TDRM across sites, the findings of this study suggests
that the Philippines, a country that has not yet encountered a national
epidemic comparable to other Southeast Asian countries \[ 15 \], had a
relatively higher TDRM proportion of 8.7%. This could be due to other
non-B subtypes \[ 16 \] prevalent in the sample (26.1%) and may warrant
further investigation into the extent of HIV RAMs within the country and
the associated key population at risk.

The proportion of TDRM for Hong Kong (3.4%) and Bangkok (4.7%) were
similar to that found previously \[ 5 , 17 \] although there were
differences in the sample sizes and sampling methodology. Chiang Mai
reported 0% TDRM, but given that only 17 patients were enrolled, it is
not possible to exclude drug resistance prevalence as high as 19.5%.

Our study had several limitations including the potential sampling bias
within the study. TASER-S included only patients attending TREAT Asia
sites. Informed consent was required from all participants, except in
the Philippines, and this may further contribute to sampling bias by
allowing only those who consented to be included in the study. Other
limitations were the possibility of patients experiencing reversion of
RAMs back to wild-type \[ 18 , 19 \]; and the possibility of
misclassification by BED assay due to its high false recent rates \[ 20
\], although this only applies to patients recruited from Hong Kong and
the Philippines. Findings of TDRM reported in this study only reflect
those participating in TASER-S and may not be generalisable to the
broader HIV-infected population across the region.

Go to:


## Conclusions

In summary, the observed proportion of TDRM in TASER-S patients from
Hong Kong, Thailand and the Philippines was low to moderate during the
study period. With the 2013 WHO guidelines recommending ART initiation
in persons with CD4 count ≤500 cells/μL \[ 21 \], and the possible
scale-up of ART due to "Test and Treat" strategies \[ 22 \], further
monitoring of acquired drug resistance in individuals on ART, as well as
regular surveillance of recently infected persons should be encouraged.

Go to:


## Acknowledgements

The TREAT Asia Studies to Evaluate Resistance (TASER) is an initiative
of TREAT Asia, a program of amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research,
with major support provided by the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs
through a partnership with Stichting Aids Fonds, and with additional
support from amfAR and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID) of the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the
National Cancer Institute (NCI) as part of the International
Epidemiologic Databases to Evaluate AIDS (IeDEA) (grant no.
U01AI069907). Queen Elizabeth Hospital and the Integrated Treatment
Centre are supported by the Hong Kong Council for AIDS Trust Fund. The
Kirby Institute is funded by the Australian Government Department of
Health and Ageing, and is affiliated with the Faculty of Medicine, UNSW
Australia (the University of New South Wales). The content of this
publication is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of any of the governments or
institutions mentioned above.



### Genbank accession numbers

The accession numbers for the sequences used in this analysis are as
follows:

KC810534-KC810543, KC810549, KC810558, KC810566, KC810785-KC810794,
KC810800, KC810809, KC810817, KC921485-KC921766, KC961260,
KC994316-KC994341, KC994397-KC994450, KF059650-KF059717,
KF059755-KF059833, KM065804-KM065831.
