# Identification and Characterization of a Novel HIV-1 Circulating Recombinant Form (CRF59_01B) Identified among Men-Who-Have-Sex-with-Men in China

Weiqing Zhang , ^\#^ ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Xiaoxu Han , ^\#^ ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Minghui An
, ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Bin Zhao , ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Qinghai Hu , ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Zhenxing Chu
, ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Jiancheng Xu , ^1\ ,^ ^2^ Weiping Cai , ^4^ Xi Chen , ^5^
Jihua Fu , ^6^ Zhe Wang , ^7^ Jianjun Wu , ^8^ Lin Lu , ^9^ Minghua
Zhuang , ^10^ Hao Wu , ^11^ Hongjing Yan , ^12^ Christina Liao , ^1\ ,^
^2^ Yutaka Takebe , ^1\ ,^ ^2\ ,^ ^3\ ,^ ^\*^ and Hong Shang ^\#^ ^1\ ,^
^2\ ,^ ^\*^

Shibo Jiang, Editor

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer



## Abstract

The HIV-1 epidemic among men-who-have-sex-with-men (MSM) continues to
expand in China. A large-scale national survey we conducted on HIV-1
strains among MSM in 11 provinces in China from 2008 to 2013 ( *n*
= 920) identified a novel transmission cluster consisting of six strains
(0.7%) that belonged to a new circulating recombinant form (designated
CRF59_01B). CRF59_01B contains two subtype B segments of U.S.-European
origin (in the *pol* and *vpu-env* regions) in a CRF01_AE backbone.
CRF59_01B is the second CRF (after CRF55_01B) circulating primarily
among MSM in China. CRF59_01B occurs at a low frequency (less than 1%),
but it was detected in four different provinces/regions in China:
Liaoning (northeast China) (n = 3); Hunan (central China) (n = 1);
Guangdong (south China) (n = 1); Yunnan (southwest China) (n = 1). One
additional recombinant strain was detected in a heterosexual individual
in Liaoning province but is not the focus of this paper. Bayesian
molecular clock analyses indicate that CRF59_01B emerged as a result of
recombination between CRF01_AE and subtype B around the year 2001. The
emergence of multiple forms of recombinants and CRFs reflects the
ever-increasing contribution of homosexual transmission in China\'s HIV
epidemic and indicates an active HIV transmission network among MSM in
China.



## Introduction

A high level of genetic diversity is the hallmark of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). HIV-1 is classified into four
groups: M, O, N and P \[1\] , \[2\] . HIV-1 group M strains are
responsible for the vast majority of HIV infections worldwide and
consist of 11 subtypes and sub-subtypes, 58 circulating recombinant
forms (CRFs) ( www.hiv.lanl.gov ), and various types of unique
recombinant forms (URFs). A variety of CRFs and URFs continue to be
detected worldwide. In particular, new CRF strains with serial numbers
above 51 were all reported from Asia: CRF51_01B from Singapore \[3\] ;
CRF52_01B from Thailand and Malaysia \[4\] ; CRF53_01B \[5\] and
CRF54_01B \[6\] from Malaysia; and CRF55_01B \[7\] from China. All CRFs
reported from Asia are recombinants of CRF01_AE and subtype B, except
CRF07_BC \[8\] and CRF08_BC \[9\] . Widespread co-circulation and dual
infection of CRF01_AE and subtype B in various regions in Asia have led
to the emergence of a large number of CRFs comprising subtype B and
CRF01_AE. Of note among them, CRF51_01B and CRF55_01B are CRFs that were
identified mainly among men-who-have-sex-with-men (MSM).

The HIV-1 epidemic continues to expand rapidly among MSM in China \[10\]
-- \[12\] . In 2011, MSM accounted for 29.4% of all newly diagnosed HIV
cases \[10\] . MSM became one of the nation\'s most targeted populations
for HIV prevention and care. Initially, the MSM population in China was
predominantly infected with subtype B \[13\] , \[14\] , the typical
U.S.-European strains that are prevalent in western countries. However,
in recent years, a dramatic shift in genotype distribution from subtype
B to CRF01_AE and other virus lineages has been observed in China \[15\]
. Furthermore, studies \[16\] , \[17\] have identified a number of
distinct phylogenetic clusters uniquely associated with the epidemic
among MSM in China: CRF01_AE clusters 1 and 2, and CRF07_BC cluster 3.
These three lineages of HIV-1 strains account for approximately 80% of
HIV-1 infections among MSM in China \[17\] . In addition, various new
recombinant strains mostly comprising CRF01_AE and subtype B have been
detected \[18\] , \[19\] .

In the present study, we discuss a new circulating recombinant form that
we identified (CRF59_01B) and that is uniquely associated with
transmission among MSM in China. Additionally, we investigate its
nationwide occurrence and the evolutionary history of it emergence.



## Materials and Methods

### Study Subjects, HIV-1 RNA Isolation and Screening of HIV-1 Genotypes

This study was performed as part of a nationwide molecular
epidemiological survey of Chinese MSM. A total of 920 plasma samples
were collected from HIV-1-seropositive MSM in 11
provinces/municipalities across China from 2008 to 2013: Jilin province
(n = 8); Liaoning province (n = 263); Beijing (n = 163); Shandong
province (n = 42); Jiangsu province (n = 49); Shanghai (n = 26); Anhui
province (n = 136); Henan province (n = 58); Hunan province (n = 68);
Guangdong province (n = 40); and Yunnan province (n = 67). This study
was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University. Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants before sample collection. HIV-1 RNA was
extracted from participants\' plasma using QIAamp Viral Mini Kits
(Qiagen, Germany) and was used to amplify and determine the nucleotide
sequences of the 1.1-kb protease-reverse transcriptase (pro-RT) region
in the *pol* gene (HXB2: 2253--3318). HIV-1 genotypes were determined
based on the neighbor-joining analysis of the Kimura 2-parameter
distance matrix and a transition-to-transversion ratio of 2.0, using
MEGA software Version 5.0

### Near Full-Length HIV- 1 Nucleotide Sequencing

Near-full-length genome (NFLG) sequences of the strains of interest were
determined using the single-gene amplification (SGA) method \[20\] to
prevent any artificial recombination that might have occurred with a
nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Briefly, plasma HIV-1 RNA was
reverse-transcribed into single-strand cDNA using Superscript III
First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, USA) with 5′-half -reverse
primer 07Rev8 ( *5′-CCTARTGGGATGTGTACTTCTGAACTT-3′* ; HXB2: 5193--5219
nt) and 3′--half-reverse primer 1.R3.B3R (
*5′-ACTACTTGAAGCACTCAAGGCAAGCTTTATTG-3′* ; HXB2: 9611--9642 nt) as
described previously \[21\] . The 5′- and 3′- halves of the HIV-1 viral
genome were independently amplified from cDNA by using two rounds of
nested PCR with specific primers \[21\] . Both PCR reactions were
performed in a final volume of 20 ul containing 15.3 ul RNase-free
Water, 2 ul 10× High-Fidelity Platinum PCR buffer, 0.8 ul MgSO ~4~ (50
mM), 0.4 ul dNTP (10 mM), 0.2 ul of each primer (20 pmol/ul), 0.1 ul
Platinum Taq High-Fidelity polymerase (Invitrogen, USA), and 1 ul
template. The first and second rounds of PCR were both performed under
the following conditions: 94°C for 2 minutes, 35 cycles at 94°C for 10
seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds, 68°C for 4.5 minutes, final extension of
10 minutes at 68°C. The second-round PCR products were electrophoresed
on 0.7% TAE agarose gel to check for positive amplification. Then, the
positive amplification products were purified and directly sequenced
using internal walking primers with an ABI 3730XL Sanger-based genetic
analyzer. All sequences were analyzed, edited and assembled by
overlapping the sequences of the two half-genome fragments with
Sequencer 4.10.1 and Bioedit version 5.0.

### Recombination breakpoint analyses

The NFLG sequences were first analyzed using the Recombination
Identification Program (RIP) and the jumping profile Hidden Markov Model
(jpHMM) on the Los Alamos HIV Sequence Database ( www.hiv.lanl.gov ) to
define the recombinant structures. Subsequently, all NFLG sequences were
aligned with HIV-1 subtypes/CRFs reference sequences using HIVAlign (
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/VIRALIGN/viralign.html ) and
then manually edited with Bioedit 5.0. A phylogenetic tree of the NFLG
was constructed by applying the neighbour-joining method based on
Kimura\'s two-parameter distance matrix with 1000 bootstrap replicates
using MEGA 5.0. Subtype B (83FR.HXB2), CRF01_AE (90TH.CM240) and subtype
C (95IN21068) were used in the bootscanning analysis with SimPlot
version 3.5.1. Insertion segments were used to build sub-regions
phylogenetic tree via the neighbour-joining method with bootstrapping to
confirm the origin of the different segments. The Recombinant HIV-1
Drawing Tool (
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/DRAWCRF/recom_mapper.html ) was
used to elucidate the structure of the new HIV-1 recombinant forms
(CRF01_AE/B).

### Estimate of Appearance of Most Recent Common Ancestor of CRF59_01B

The rate of the evolution of different segments of CRF59_01B were
estimated from a set of subtype B and CRF01_AE references with known
sampling dates using BEAST v.1.6.0. Dates were estimated using Bayesian
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) inference under both the general
time-reversal (GTR) and Hasegawa-Kishino-Yano (HKY) nucleotide
substitution models. The MCMC analysis was computed for 20 million
states sampled at every 1000 states, and the MCMC results were evaluated
using the Tracer 1.5 program. All parameters were estimated from an
effective sampling size (ESS) \>200. The maximum clade credibility (MCC)
trees were viewed and edited using FigTree v1.3.1.



## Results

### Identification of Novel Circulating Recombinant Form (CRF59_01B) among MSM in China

The primary screening of HIV-1 genotypes based on 1.1-kb *pol* (pro-RT)
region sequences revealed that the genotype distribution of HIV-1
strains circulating among MSM in 11 provinces in China (n = 920) were as
depicted in Figure 1A : CRF01_AE (533, 57.9%); CRF07_BC (223, 24.2%); B
(101, 11.0%); B′ (Thai variant of subtype B) (11, 1.2%); CRF08_BC (4,
0.4%); CRF33_01B (1, 0.1%); other recombinants (47, 5.1%). Furthermore,
CRF01_AE strains were classified into two distinct clusters \[16\] ,
\[17\] : cluster 1 (295, 32.1%) and cluster 2 (232, 25.2%). Similarly,
most CRF07_BC strains formed a unique phylogenetic cluster that is
designated cluster 3 (210, 22.8%) \[17\] . Additionally, 19 strains
(2.1%) belong to the recently-identified CRF55_01B strain \[7\] .

Figure 1

**HIV-1 genotype distribution among MSM in China and map of China
depicting the occurrence of CRF59_01B.**

\(A\) The overall genotype distribution of HIV-1 strains among MSM newly
diagnosed during 2008--2013 in 11 provinces in China (n = 920). (B) Map
of China. Study sites (11 provinces) and the proportion of CRF59_01B
among HIV-1 strains in their respective provinces.

Within a group of other recombinant strains (n = 28), we found that six
strains (0.7%) formed a distinct phylogenetic cluster that is different
from any other known HIV-1 genotype: 3 from Liaoning province
(northeast), and 1 each from Guangdong, Yunnan and Hunan provinces (
Table 1 , Figure 1B ). Furthermore, we also identified one additional
strain (11CN.LNSY300876) that belonged to this cluster from a
heterosexual male in Liaoning province ( Table 1 ). These seven study
subjects share no obvious epidemiologic link. Recombination breakpoint
analysis revealed that these seven strains contained a small subtype B
segment in a CRF01_AE backbone in the 1.1-kb *pol* segment (data not
shown).

### Table 1

**Summary of demographic and genotype information of study subjects
infected with CRF59_01B in China.**

Study subject

Geographic origin Province (City)

Sampling year

Age

Sex

Risk factor

Genome sequence

Accession number

Remarks

09CN.LNSY300423

Liaoning (Shenyang)

2009

51

M

MSM

NFLG

JX960635

Cite \[16\]

10CN.LNSY300533

Liaoning (Shenyang)

2010

31

M

Bisexual

NFLG

KC462191

Cite \[30\]

11CN.LNSY300392

Liaoning (Shenyang)

2011

51

M

MSM

NFLG

KC462190

Cite \[30\]

11CN.GDMM152

Guangdong (Maoming)

2011

40

M

MSM

NFLG

KJ484433

This study

12CN.YNKM200199

Yunnan (Kunming)

2012

43

M

MSM

NFLG

KJ484434

This study

12CN.HNCS501137

Hunan (Changsha)

2012

24

M

MSM

1.1-kb pol (pro-RT)

KJ484435

This study

11CN.LNSY300876

Liaoning (Shenyang)

2011

45

M

Heterosexual

NFLG

KJ484436

This study

Open in a separate window

M, Male; MSM, men-who-have-sex-with-men; NFLG, near full-length genome.

To define the detailed subtype structure of these strains, we determined
the NFLG sequences from the plasma RNA samples. We successfully
amplified and determined the NFLG sequences of six of the seven study
subjects (all except 12CN.HNCS501137 from Hunan) ( Table 1 ). As shown
in Figure 2 , a total of six NFLG sequences (five from MSM; one from a
heterosexual male) ( Table 1 ) formed a distinct monophyletic cluster
that is distinct from any other known subtype or CRF. Recombination
breakpoint analysis revealed that these six NFLG sequences shared
identical recombinant structures in which two subtype B regions
(nucleotide position 2570--2718 in the *pol* region and 6149--8243 nt in
the region relative to the HXB2 genome) were located in a CRF01_AE
backbone ( Figure 3 ). The recombinant structure is distinct from any
other known CRFs comprising CRF01_AE and subtype B, including CRF15_01B
\[22\] , CRF33_01B \[23\] , CRF34_01B \[24\] , CRF48_01B \[25\] ,
CRF51_01B \[3\] , CRF52_01B \[4\] , CRF53_01B \[5\] , CRF54_01B \[6\] ,
and CRF55 01B \[7\] . Subregion tree analyses further confirmed the
parental origins of each region of the recombinant genome as follows (
Figure 3C ): Region I (HXB2: 790--2569) = CRF01_AE; Region II (HXB2:
2570--2718) = B; Region III (HXB2: 2719--6148) = CRF01_AE; Region IV
(HXB2: 6149--8243) = B; Region V (HXB2: 8244--9600) = CRF01_AE.
Subregion tree analyses also indicated that the subtype B regions
(Region II+IV) were of U.S.-European origin and not the type B′ (Thai
variant of subtype B) \[26\] , \[27\] lineage associated with
blood-borne epidemics in Asia \[28\] . Additionally, the CRF01_AE
regions were found in the Thailand CRF01_AE radiation and were not
related to the CRF01_AE variants (clusters 1 and 2) that we recently
identified among MSM in China \[29\] . We designated these novel
CRF01_AE/B recombinants as CRF59_01B \[30\] .

Figure 2

**Neighbor-joining tree analysis of the near full-length nucleotide
sequences of CRF59_01B.**

The neighbor-joining tree was constructed using the near full-length
nucleotide sequences (8.8 kb) (HXB2: 790--9600 nt) of CRF59_01B strains
identified in six epidemiologically-unlinked individuals \[five MSM (Bi)
and one heterosexual\] from China ( Table 1 ). These strains are
compared with the reference sequences of all known subtypes/sub-subtypes
as well as CRFs relevant to this study, including CRF15_01B, CRF34_01B
and CRF52_01B from Thailand; CRF51_01B from Singapore; CRF33_01B,
CRF48_01B, CRF53_01B and CRF54_01B from Malaysia; and CRF55_01B from
China ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/index ). Bootstrap values (\>70)
of the respective nodes are indicated. 01 th = Thailand CRF01_AE; 01 af
= African CRF01_AE; Chinese MSM clusters 1 and 2 = CRF01_AE variants
associated with transmission among MSM in China.

Figure 3

**Recombination breakpoint analyses of CRF59_01B.**

\(A\) Bootscanning plot analysis. Analyses were performed using CRF01_AE
(90TH.CM240) and subtype B (83FR.HXB2) as parental subtypes, and subtype
C (95IN21068) as an out-group with a moving window of 350 nt with a step
of 50 nt. Numbers represent nucleotide positions relative to the HXB2
genome. (B) The deduced subtype structure. Black = subtype B (of
U.S.-European origin); gray = CRF01_AE; blank = no sequence data
available. (C) Subgenomic phylogenies estimated using the
neighbor-joining method from alignments representing Regions I, III, V
(CRF01_AE) and the concatenated II+IV (subtype B) region. Bootstrap
scores greater than 70% are indicated at corresponding nodes. 01 th
= Thailand CRF01_AE; 01 af = African CRF01_AE; clusters 1 and
2 = CRF01_AE variants associated with transmission among MSM in China.

### Evolutionary Characteristics of CRF59_01B

To estimate the timeline of emergence of CRF59_01B, we performed
Bayesian molecular clock analyses on the CRF01_AE regions \[Regions I
(HXB2: 790--2569 nt), II (HXB2: 2719--6418 nt), III (HXB2: 8244--9600
nt) and concatenated genome regions for CRF01_AE (Regions I+III+V)(HXB2:
790--2569; 2719--6418; 8244--9600)\] and on the subtype B regions
\[Region IVa (HXB: 7626--8243 nt) and the concatenated subtype B region
(Regions II+IVa) (HXB2: 2570--2718; 7626--8243)\] ( Figure 4 ),
respectively. Analyses were performed by using a relaxed molecular clock
approach. Since the most recent common ancestor estimates (tMRCAs) using
individual or combined regions for CRF01_AE \[Regions I, III, V or the
concatenated CRF01_AE region (I+III+V)\] and subtype B regions \[Regions
IVa or the concatenated subtype B region (II+IVa)\] yielded essentially
similar results. For simplicity, we are showing the MCC trees for only
the concatenated CRF01_AE region (I+III+V) and the subtype B (II+IVa)
region ( Figure 4 ).

Figure 4

**Maximum clade credibility (MCC) trees of CRF59_01B.**

The MCC tree was obtained by Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
analysis of the concatenated CRF01_AE \[(Regions I+III+V) (HXB2:
790--2569; 2719--6418; 8244--9600)\] regions and subtype B \[(Regions
II+IVa) (HXB2: 2570--2718; 7626--8243)\] regions, using a relaxed clock
model in GTR+G4 with a constant coalescent model. Analyses were
implemented in BEAST v.1.6.0. HIV-1 subtype C sequences are used as an
out-group. The medians of the estimated tMRCAs with 95% highest
probability density (HPD) (in parentheses) and the posterior probability
(\>0.95) of the nodes relevant to this study are indicated. (C) The
distribution of the posterior probability of the estimated tMRCAs for
CRF59_01B as well as the related CRF01_AE lineages (top) and subtype B
lineages (bottom).

As shown in Figure 4 , the estimated tMRCAs for concatenated CRF01_AE
regions (Regions I+III+V) and subtype B regions (Regions II+IVa) were
2000.6 \[95% highest probability density (HPD): 1998.0, 2002.9\] and
2001.2 \[95% highest probability density (HPD): 1995.4, 2005.8\],
respectively ( Figure 4 ). These resulting estimated tMRCAs for the
CRF01_AE and subtype B regions are consistent with each other ( Figure
4C ). This suggests that the recombination generating CRF59_01B from
parental lineages of subtype B and CRF01_AE occurred around the year
2001. In contrast, the estimated tMRCAs for Chinese MSM CRF01_AE cluster
1 \[1989.4 (1986.8--1992.0)\] and cluster 2 \[1996.7(1993.6--1999.2)\]
are significantly earlier than those of CRF59_01B ( Figure 4 ).



## Discussion

The large-scale national survey we conducted on HIV-1 strains
circulating among MSM in China ( Figure 1 ) identified a new CRF that we
designated CRF59_01B ( Figure 2 , ​ ,3). 3 ). CRF59_01B is the second CRF
(after CRF55_01B \[7\] ) to circulate primarily among MSM in China. This
is the third CRF (after CRF51_01B from Singapore \[3\] and CRF55_01B
\[7\] ) to be identified among MSM in Asia. The appearance of this CRF
reflects the recent upsurge of disease activity among MSM throughout the
Chinese regions we studied \[31\] . As shown in the subregion trees (
Figure 3C ), the subtype B regions of CRF59_01B are of U.S.-Eurpoean
origin, not of the subtype B′ (Thai variant of subtype B), which is
associated with blood-borne epidemics in Asia. Additionally, CRF01_AE
regions were found in the Thai CRF01_AE radiation and are not related to
any CRF01_AE variants (clusters 1 and 2) that were recently identified
among MSM in China \[17\] . As demonstrated in previous studies \[13\] ,
subtype B was the predominant strain among MSM in China initially, but
CRF01_AE has showed increasing prevalence among Chinese MSM in recent
years. The co-circulation of these two HIV-1 lineages has led to the
generation of various recombinants between the Thai CRF01_AE and subtype
B strains, including CRF55_01B and CRF59_01B. These recombinants are
distinct from other known CRFs consisting of CRF01_AE and subtype B′,
including CRF15_01B and CRF34_01B from Thailand; CRF33_01B, CRF48_01B,
CRF53_01B, CRF54_01B from Malaysia; and CRF52_01B from Thailand and
Malaysia.

While CRF55_01B circulated widely among MSM in southern Chinese
provinces, accounting for more than 10% of HIV-1 infections among MSM
(X. Han et al., un- published data), CRF59_01B showed limited
circulation among Chinese MSM. Although only a few CRF59_01B strains
have been identified to date, they have been detected among MSM in
various regions in China: 1.1% (3 of 263) in Liaoning from 2008 to 2012;
1.5% (1 of 68) in Hunan from 2010 to 2012; 2.5% (1 of 40) in Guangdong
from 2011 to 2012; 1.5% (1 of 67) in Yunnan in 2012 ( Figure 1B ). These
detections may suggest that an unknown focus of CRF59_01B is present
outside the study sites. Alternatively, CRF59_01B has a very limited
circulation, but the high mobility exhibited by the MSM population may
explain the strain\'s sporadic and diffuse distribution across China.

According to the behavior studies \[32\] , \[33\] , most MSM lack a
basic knowledge about HIV/AIDS and usually have multiple sexual partners
with whom they exhibit unprotected sexual behavior. Indeed, the rate of
infection of sexually transmitted diseases, such as syphilis, is
remarkably high in many cities: 27.7% in Nanjing and Yangzhou \[34\] ,
31.1% in Shenyang \[35\] , and 14.3% in Harbin \[36\] . These factors
make it possible for MSM to experience multiple HIV infections and
superinfections, facilitating the emergence of new recombinant strains
and their rapid dissemination across China. The emergence of CRF55_01B
and CRF59_01B suggests that new recombinant forms comprising the
CRF01_AE and subtype B lineages are actively being generated among MSM
in various regions of China.



## Funding Statement

This work was supported by Mega-projects of National Science Research
for the 12th Five-Year Plan (2012ZX10001-006), Liaoning Province
Department of Higher Education Programme for Excellence in Research 2012
(LJQ2012068), Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Development Programme
of the innovative group by Ministry of Education, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
Hangzhou, China. The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

