

## Request Username

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

Email\*

Close


## Create a new account

Email

Returning user


## Change Password

Old Password

New Password

close

-    Login
-    Register

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-

Email\*

Password\*

Forgot password? Reset it here

Keep me logged in

Fields with \* are mandatory

Don\'t have an account? Create one here

-

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your password?

Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset
instructions

Email\*

Cancel

CLOSE

This Journal

Enter words / phrases / DOI / ISBN / keywords / authors / etc

Search Search

Advanced search

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

Suggested Terms:

-   open access policy
-   peer review at ASM
-   what it costs to publish with ASM
-   calls for editors
-   asm journals collections

0

Login

Skip main navigation

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

JOURNALS

0

Login

::: {role="main"}

1.   ASM Journals
2.   Journal of Virology
3.   Vol. 89, No. 1
4.   Mutation V111I in HIV-2 Reverse Transcriptase Increases the Fitness
of the Nucleoside Analogue-Resistant K65R and Q151M Viruses

Advertisement

Research Article

16 December 2014

Share on

-
-
-
-


# Mutation V111I in HIV-2 Reverse Transcriptase Increases the Fitness of the Nucleoside Analogue-Resistant K65R and Q151M Viruses

Authors : Ilona P. Deuzing , Charlotte Charpentier , David W. Wright ,
Sophie Matheron , Jack Paton , Dineke Frentz , David A. van de Vijver ,
Peter V. Coveney , Diane Descamps , the ANRS CO5 HIV-2 Cohort , Charles
A. B. Boucher , Nancy Beerens Authors Info & Affiliations

DOI : https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.02259-14

14
2,197

### Metrics

###  Total Citations   14

###  Total Downloads   2,197

Cite

PDF/EPUB

-    Contents

JVI

Volume 89 , Number 1 \
1 January 2015

-   ABSTRACT
-   INTRODUCTION
-   MATERIALS AND METHODS
-   RESULTS
-   DISCUSSION
-   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
-   REFERENCES

-
-    Information & Contributors
-    Metrics & Citations
-    References
-    Figures and Media
-    Tables
-    Share

::: section

## ABSTRACT

Infection with HIV-2 can ultimately lead to AIDS, although disease
progression is much slower than with HIV-1. HIV-2 patients are mostly
treated with a combination of nucleoside reverse transcriptase (RT)
inhibitors (NRTIs) and protease inhibitors designed for HIV-1. Many
studies have described the development of HIV-1 resistance to NRTIs and
identified mutations in the polymerase domain of RT. Recent studies have
shown that mutations in the connection and RNase H domains of HIV-1 RT
may also contribute to resistance. However, only limited information
exists regarding the resistance of HIV-2 to NRTIs. In this study,
therefore, we analyzed the polymerase, connection, and RNase H domains
of RT in HIV-2 patients failing NRTI-containing therapies. Besides the
key resistance mutations K65R, Q151M, and M184V, we identified a novel
mutation, V111I, in the polymerase domain. This mutation was
significantly associated with mutations K65R and Q151M. Sequencing of
the connection and RNase H domains of the HIV-2 patients did not reveal
any of the mutations that were reported to contribute to NRTI resistance
in HIV-1. We show that V111I does not strongly affect drug
susceptibility but increases the replication capacity of the K65R and
Q151M viruses. Biochemical assays demonstrate that V111I restores the
polymerization defects of the K65R and Q151M viruses but negatively
affects the fidelity of the HIV-2 RT enzyme. Molecular dynamics
simulations were performed to analyze the structural changes mediated by
V111I. This showed that V111I changed the flexibility of the 110-to-115
loop region, which may affect deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP)
binding and polymerase activity.

**IMPORTANCE** Mutation V111I in the HIV-2 reverse transcriptase enzyme
was identified in patients failing therapies containing nucleoside
analogues. We show that the V111I change does not strongly affect the
sensitivity of HIV-2 to nucleoside analogues but increases the fitness
of viruses with drug resistance mutations K65R and Q151M.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

Human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) differs from HIV-1 by its
lower pathogenicity and lower infectivity rate ( 1 , 2 ). This has
resulted in a more restricted spread of HIV-2, mainly to parts of West
Africa ( 3 ). Disease progression is slower than in HIV-1 infection;
however, HIV-2-infected patients can ultimately develop AIDS. HIV-2
patients are treated with antiretroviral drugs designed for HIV-1,
although the sequences of HIV-1 and HIV-2 differ by about 60% at the
nucleotide level. The reverse transcriptase (RT) enzymes of the two
viruses diverge by approximately 40% at the amino acid level but are
similar in overall structure and function. Both are heterodimers
composed of a large catalytic subunit and a small subunit for structural
support. The catalytic subunit is composed of two domains: the
polymerase domain, containing the fingers, palm, thumb, and connection
subdomains, and the RNase H domain ( 4 ). RT is crucial in the
retroviral life cycle, as it converts the single-stranded RNA genome
into a double-stranded DNA that becomes integrated into the genome of
the host cell. Reverse transcription of both HIV-1 and HIV-2 can be
inhibited by nucleoside/nucleotide RT inhibitors (NRTIs). When
incorporated into the nascent viral DNA, these nucleoside analogues act
as chain terminators ( 5 , 6 ). However, HIV-2 was found to be
intrinsically resistant to nonnucleoside RT inhibitors (NNRTIs) ( 4 , 7
). In addition, HIV-2 is resistant to the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide (
8 ) and exhibits reduced susceptibility to some of the protease
inhibitors ( 9 , 10 ). This limits the therapeutic possibilities for
HIV-2 patients, and most patients, therefore, are on regimens containing
two NRTIs with a protease inhibitor. Due to the low number of patients
and the limited geographical spread of HIV-2, little information is
available concerning the efficacy of antiretroviral therapy and the
emergence of drug resistance.

Treatment of HIV with NRTIs can eventually result in the selection of
viruses with decreased susceptibility to NRTIs. This means that specific
mutations in RT enhance the ability to select normal deoxynucleoside
triphosphates (dNTPs) over the analogues. Two primary mechanisms have
been identified by which resistance is mediated in HIV-1 (for a review,
see reference 11 ). One mechanism is exclusion, in which the mutant RT
has a reduced ability to bind and incorporate the analogue. Mutations
associated with this mechanism in HIV-1 are K65R, Q151M, and M184V. The
second mechanism is excision of the analogue by ATP-mediated
pyrophosphorolysis. In this mechanism, the analogue is still efficiently
incorporated but is removed from the end of the primer using ATP as a
pyrophosphate donor. Mutations associated with this mechanism in HIV-1
are collectively called thymidine analogue mutations (TAMs). Several
studies suggest that HIV-1 and HIV-2 evolve NRTI resistance by different
mutational pathways. Although relying on limited amounts of genotypic
data for HIV-2, three key resistance mutations, K65R, Q151M, and M184V,
were reported to be associated with drug resistance ( 12 -- 15 ). The
K65R and Q151M substitutions are more common in HIV-2 than in HIV-1 and
often appear together with M184V in patients who received NRTI therapy.
This suggests that HIV-2 RT favors the exclusion pathway for resistance
to NRTI. In contrast, the TAMs that provide the principal route to NRTI
resistance in HIV-1 by the excision pathway are rarely observed in
HIV-2. This difference between HIV-1 and HIV-2 may be explained by the
reduced ability of the HIV-2 RT enzyme to carry out the excision
reaction using ATP-mediated pyrophosphorolysis ( 16 , 17 ). The
individual contributions of the key resistance mutations K65R, Q151M,
and M184V in HIV-2 were addressed using site-directed mutants in cell
culture-based phenotypic assays ( 18 ). This study showed that the
combination of the three mutations is sufficient for classwide NRTI
resistance. Recently, a rule set for HIV-2 drug resistance
interpretation was defined, and an automated Internet tool was developed
to support resistance analyses ( 19 ).

However, the roles of several mutations in the polymerase domain of RT
remain unclear. For instance, mutation V111I was reported to be
coselected with mutation Q151M in HIV-2 patients failing therapy ( 14 ,
15 , 20 ). A study using patient-derived HIV-2 isolates suggested that
Q151M alone confers resistance only to stavudine (d4T) and abacavir
(ABC), whereas resistance to other NRTIs involved the coselection of
V111I ( 20 ). In contrast, another study showed that mutation Q151M
alone is sufficient to produce high-level zidovudine (AZT) resistance,
and therefore, V111I was not required for broad-spectrum NRTI resistance
( 18 ). Recent studies on HIV-1 suggest that mutations in the connection
and RNase H domains of RT may contribute to NRTI and NNRTI resistance
(for a review, see reference 21 ). In this study, we further explore the
roles of additional mutations in the polymerase, connection, and RNase H
domains of HIV-2 RT. Therefore, the complete RT genes of 54 HIV-2
patient isolates were sequenced. Besides the key resistance mutations
K65R, Q151M, and M184V, we identified mutation V111I in the polymerase
domain. This mutation was significantly associated with mutations K65R
and Q151M. In the connection and RNase H domains, two polymorphisms
(V357I and K467V) were found with increased frequency in patients
failing therapy. However, none of the connection subdomain mutations
reported for HIV-1 (for a review, see reference 21 ) were found in HIV-2
patients. We show that V111I does not strongly affect drug
susceptibility but increases the replication capacity of the K65R and
Q151M viruses. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed to analyze
the structural changes mediated by V111I. Biochemical assays show that
V111I restores the polymerization defects of the K65R and Q151M viruses
but negatively affects the fidelity of the HIV-2 RT enzyme.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Sequencing of HIV-2 patient samples.

Plasma samples from HIV-2 subtype A patients in the French National
HIV-2 cohort were collected. The study was approved by the institutional
review board of the French Agence Nationale de Recherche sur le SIDA et
les Hépatites Virales (ANRS) CO5 HIV-2 Cohort. Written informed consent
was obtained from each patient at the time of inclusion in the French
ANRS CO5 HIV-2 Cohort. Plasma HIV-2 RNA was quantified using real-time
PCR ( 22 ). Plasma RNA was extracted using a Qiagen viral RNA minikit.
The RT, connection, and RNase H domains were amplified using the RTC
(5′-ATGACAGGGGATACCCCAATCAACATTTTTG-3′) and Pol D
(5′-CTTCTTTTAAAATTCATGCAATGAACTGCC-3′) primers for the real-time PCR.
Nested PCRs were performed using RTC/RT4
(5′-TCCCCAAATGACTAGTGCTTCTTTTCCTA-3′), RT3
(5′-GAGGCACTAAAAGAGATCTGTGAAAAAATGG-3′)/RT2
(5′-GAAGTCCCAGTCTGGGATCCATGTCACTTGCCA-3′), and RT4S
(5′-AAAAGAAGCACTAGTCATTTGGGG-3′)/Pol D primers. The nested-PCR products
were sequenced using ABI Technologies RTC, RT4, RT3, RT2, RT4S, and Pol
D primers. We previously showed that in 50% of the samples that had a
viral load below 250 copies/ml, amplification of the RT gene failed and
sequencing was not possible ( 2 ). In the available plasma samples,
amplification of the complete RT gene was successful in 19 out of 30
antiretroviral (ARV)-naive patients, and 35 out of 45 ARV-treated
HIV-2-infected patients who received NRTI-containing regimens were
studied. At the time of virological failure, the patients were on
regimens containing the NRTIs AZT (55%), didanosine (ddI) (18%), d4T
(21%), lamivudine (3TC) (73%), ABC (18%), and tenofovir (TDF) (24%).

### DNA constructs.

The HIV-2 group A infectious molecular clone pROD9 (a kind gift from
Robert Smith) was generated by Michael Emerman, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA. For mutation of the RT gene, we used the
construct pBS-RT2, which contains the XhoI-AvrII fragment of pROD9
(positions 2979 to 3861) cloned into pBluescript (Agilent Technologies).
The K65R, M184V, Q151M, and V111I mutations were introduced using the
QuikChange Lightning site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent
Technologies) according to the manufacturer\'s protocol. The
substitution was verified by sequencing analysis and cloned into the
pROD9 construct using the XhoI-AvrII restriction sites.

### Cells and viruses.

293T and TZM-bl cells were grown in Dulbecco\'s modified Eagle\'s medium
(DMEM) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) at 37°C and 5% CO ~2~ . For
generation of the HIV-2 stocks, 293T cells were transiently transfected
using the calcium phosphate method (CalPhos kit; Clontech) according to
the manufacturer\'s protocol. Three days after transfection, the culture
medium was centrifuged at 1,600 rpm for 10 min to remove cells and
subsequently filtered through a 0.45-μm-pore-size filter. The virions
were pelleted by centrifugation at 25,000 rpm for 60 min in a Beckman
SW28 rotor. The virions were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline,
and aliquots were stored at −80°C.

SupT1 T cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FCS
at 37°C and 5% CO ~2~ . The replication capacity of the viruses was
studied in SupT1 cells. Therefore, 0.5 × 10 ^6^ cells were seeded in a
25-cm ^2^ culture flask containing 5 ml of culture medium.

### Titration of virus stocks.

Titration of the HIV-2 stocks was performed using a 50% tissue culture
infective dose (TCID ~50~ ) assay in TZM-bl cells. The single-round
infection assay was performed in white 96-well flat-bottom culture
plates (Costar) seeded with 10.000 cells in 100 μl culture medium. The
cells were incubated overnight with RT inhibitors prior to the addition
of 100 μl of virus serially diluted in culture medium, in quadruplicate.
The cells were incubated for 48 h. Then, the medium was removed, and the
wells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline. Finally, 25 μl of d
-luciferin (Duchefa Biochemie) reagent was added to the wells, and after
a 5-min incubation in the dark, the luminescence was measured using a
luminometer (CentroPRO; Berthold Technologies).

### Drug susceptibility assays.

Virus stocks were titrated, and equal amounts of infectious virus were
used to infect TZM-bl cells in the presence or absence of RT inhibitors.
Fourfold dilutions were used for all RTIs, and the range of dilutions
used for each drug was a function of the 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC ~50~ ) of the respective compound. After 3 days, luciferase
expression was measured using a luminometer. The results were expressed
as IC ~50~ s, defined as the concentration of compound (μmol/liter)
achieving 50% inhibition of the virus-induced luciferase expression
compared to the untreated virus-infected control cells. The ratio
between the mutant and wild-type virus IC ~50~ s gives the fold change
value, as an indicator of the level of resistance mediated by the
substitution. The RT inhibitors AZT, ddI, d4T. 3TC, emtricitabine (FTC),
ABC, and TDF were obtained through the NIH AIDS Research and Reference
Reagent Program.

### Competition experiments.

Pairwise competition experiments were performed at least in triplicate
from independent plasmid isolations and virus stocks to determine the
relative fitness of the viruses. Cells (0.5 × 10 ^6^ ) were infected
with equal amounts (50 times the TCID ~50~ ) of the two different
viruses. Virus replication was monitored by the microscopic detection of
syncytia. At peak infection, a small sample (10 μl) of cell-free
supernatant was passaged onto fresh cells to continue the competition.
Cells were harvested at several time points, total cellular DNA was
isolated, and the frequencies of the two viruses were determined by
sequencing. The relative peak heights at the mutated position were
calculated from Sanger electropherograms using a plug-in (developed by
Patrick Dekker) for the CLCbio workbench.

### Preparation of protein structures for simulation.

In order to perform molecular dynamics simulations, we required models
of the structures of both the wild-type and V111I mutant HIV-2 RTs. The
only available crystal structure of HIV-2 RT (Protein Data Bank \[PDB\]
code 1MU2) is incomplete and is missing several key loops, including
that involved in dNTP binding ( 23 ). In order to build a complete
protein structure for simulation, we created a homology model using the
1MU2 structure in conjunction with a complete HIV-1 RT structure (PDB
code 1HQU) as templates ( 24 ). Both the creation of the wild-type
homology model and subsequent incorporation of the V111 mutation were
carried out using the Modeler software package ( 25 ). The regions of
the HIV-2 RT structure completed through this modeling process are p68
residues 1 and 2, 68 to 71, 133 to 141, and 357 to 358 and p51 residues
65 to 68, 92 to 94, and 212 to 228. In each case, the final model
contains 555 residues in the first (p68) chain and 431 in the second
(p55) chain for a total of 986 residues. The system was prepared for
simulation using the tools provided by the GROMACS 4.6.0 package ( 26 ),
with parameters taken from the AMBER99SB-ILDN force field ( 27 ). Each
system was solvated using a cubic box of single-point charge (SPC) water
molecules providing a buffer of at least 14 Å distance around the
protein ( 28 ). The systems were neutralized by the addition of sodium
ions.

### Molecular dynamics simulation protocol.

All molecular dynamics simulations during this study were performed
using GROMACS 4.6.0 ( 26 ). The initial structures were energy minimized
for 5,000 steps using the steepest descent algorithm in order to remove
any steric clashes or strained bond angles. After minimization, the
quality of the models was assessed using the PSVS server (
http://psvs-1_5-dev.nesg.org/ ). Both starting models were found to be
of good quality using all metrics provided by the server, with less than
1% of the residues having phi-psi angles in the disallowed region of the
Ramachandran plot. Five replica simulations were created for each
sequence, differing only in the random initial velocities assigned to
each atom. Equilibration of the temperature and pressure of the system
was conducted in two stages, the first in the isothermal-isovolumetric
(NVT) ensemble and the second in the isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble.
Both of these steps lasted 100 ps and used the modified Berendsen
thermostat ( 29 ) to maintain a temperature of 300 K. In the NPT stage,
the pressure was controlled using a Parinello-Rahman barostat with a
target pressure of 10 ^5^ Pa ( 30 ). Throughout this equilibration
phase, positional restraints were applied to the heavy atoms in the
protein to prevent unwanted motion from occurring before equilibrium was
reached. Positional restraints on the protein were then released, and 5
ns of unrestrained dynamics was run (all other simulation conditions
were identical to those in the NPT equilibration runs). After this
point, the global root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the structure
relative to the crystal structure was calculated to ensure that
equilibration was complete. The track of the RMSD over time plateaued
after approximately 2 ns for all simulations (data not shown).
Coordinates from all simulations were sampled once every 10 ps, and data
analysis was carried out using GROMACS and VMD ( 31 ). All protein
images were visualized in VMD.

### Virion-derived RT.

293T cells were transiently transfected as described above. Three days
after transfection, the culture medium was centrifuged at 1,600 rpm for
10 min to remove the cells and filtered through a 0.45-μm-pore-size
filter. The virions were pelleted by centrifugation at 25,000 rpm for 60
min in a Beckman SW28 rotor. The virions were resuspended and pooled in
100 μl of NP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40),
and aliquots were stored at −20°C.

### Polymerase assays.

The HIV-2 molecular clone ROD9 and the HIV-1 molecular clone pNL4.3 were
used as templates for the PCR amplification and subsequent *in vitro*
transcription. Positions +1 to +368 of the HIV-1 genome were amplified
using a forward primer containing the T7 RNA polymerase promoter
sequence (5′- *TAATACGACTCACTATAG* GGTCTCTCTGGTTAGACCAG-3′; italics
indicate the T7 sequence) and reverse primer
(5′-CATCTCTCTCCTTCTAGCCTC-3′). Positions +1060 to +1396 of the HIV-2
genome were amplified using forward primer (5′- *TAATACGACTCACTATA*
GGTCATTCGGTGTTCACCTG-3′) and reverse primer
(5′-CATCTCCCACAATCTTCTACC-3′). *In vitro* RNA transcription was mediated
using the T-7 Megascript kit (Ambion), and RNA was purified using the
Megaclear kit (Ambion) according to the manufacturer\'s protocol.

Minus-strand DNA synthesis was initiated on the RNA templates using a
using a 21-nucleotide (nt) DNA primer complementary to the 18-nt primer
binding site (PBS) sequence with 3 additional nucleotides at its 5′ end
(HIV-1, 5′-CAAGTCCCTGTTCGGGCGCCA-3′, and HIV-2,
5′-CAAGTCCCTGTTCAGGCGCCA-3′). The DNA primer was 5′ end labeled with
\[γ- ^32^ P\]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase (NEB) and purified using
NucAway columns (Ambion). For annealing, 50 ng of RNA template was
incubated with 10 ng of labeled DNA primer in 15 μl annealing buffer (83
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 125 mM KCl) for 10 min at 65°C, followed by snap
cooling on ice. Polymerization was initiated by the addition of equal
amounts of virus lysate (based on the TCID ~50~ ) in 40 μl of RT buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM dithiothreitol \[DTT\], 10 μM
dNTPs, 3 mM MgCl ~2~ ). The reaction mixtures were incubated for 30, 60,
and 120 min at 37°C and then stopped by the addition of formamide
loading buffer and analyzed on 10% denaturing sequencing gels. The
products were quantified using the Typhoon imaging system (GE
Healthcare).

### Fidelity assays.

The abilities of the wild-type and V111I RTs to incorporate a single
correct or incorrect nucleotide were measured using the HIV-2 RNA
template and DNA primer complementary to the PBS (see above). The DNA
primer was 5′ end labeled with \[γ- ^32^ P\]ATP and T4 polynucleotide
kinase (NEB) and purified from a denaturing 10% gel. For annealing, 50
ng of RNA template was incubated with 10 ng of labeled DNA primer in 15
μl annealing buffer (83 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 125 mM KCl) for 10 min at
65°C, followed by snap cooling on ice. The primer-template complex was
incubated with equal amounts of virus lysate (based on the TCID ~50~ )
in 10 μl of RT buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM DTT, 3
mM MgCl ~2~ , and increasing concentrations of either dATP or dTTP) for
5 min at 37°C. The reactions were stopped by the addition of formamide
loading buffer and analyzed on 12% denaturing sequencing gels. The
products were quantified using the Typhoon imaging system (GE
Healthcare).

### Statistical analysis.

The proportions of sequences containing a particular mutation were
compared between groups using Fisher\'s exact test. IC ~50~ values were
compared using a *t* test. Because *P* values were not corrected for
multiple comparisons, findings of statistical significance should be
considered provisional. Statistical analyses were performed using R
version 3.0.3.

### Nucleotide sequence accession numbers.

The HIV-2 RT and RNase H sequences were deposited in GenBank with
accession numbers KM208882 to KM208955.

::: section

## RESULTS

### Identification of mutation V111I in HIV-2 patients.

To identify mutations in the polymerase, connection, and RNase H domains
of HIV-2 RT that mediate resistance to NRTIs, we sequenced the complete
RT genes of patients in the French National HIV-2 cohort. The complete
RT sequences of 19 ARV-naive and 35 ARV-treated patients failing an
NRTI-containing regimen were analyzed. The patients were all infected
with HIV-2 subtype A. The ARV-treated patients received therapies with 2
or 3 NRTIs with or without a protease inhibitor. The patient
characteristics and treatment regimen are summarized in Table 1 . The
key resistance mutation K65R was found in 40%, M184V in 51%, and Q151M
in 31% of the ARV-treated patients, and these mutations were highly
associated with virological failure ( Table 2 ). In addition, mutation
V111I in the polymerase domain was found in 43% of the viruses retrieved
from ARV-treated patients, whereas the mutation was not detected in
viruses from ARV-naive patients. Analysis of the connection and RNase H
domains identified two polymorphisms, V356I and I467V, that were found
with increased frequency in patients failing therapy ( Table 2 ). No
other significant changes were identified in the polymerase, connection,
or RNase H domain of the HIV-2 RT enzyme. Further analysis of mutation
V111I showed that the mutation is significantly associated with key
resistance mutations K65R and Q151M, but not with mutation M184V ( Table
3 ). No differences were observed between the patients harboring viruses
with or without V111I with regard to the number or type of NRTIs they
received or the number of months on treatment. Combinations of the key
resistance mutations (K65R and M184V, K65R and Q151M, and Q151M and
M184V) were found in 9%, 6%, and 9% of the ARV-treated patients,
respectively. The triple mutant (K65R, Q151M, and M184V) was found in 9%
of the patients. No significant association was found between mutation
V111I and these combination mutants.

TABLE 1

^a^

IQR, interquartile range; PI/r, protease inhibitor boosted with
ritonavir.

TABLE 2

^a^

*P* values of \<0.05 are considered significant.

^b^

Based on 15 naive and 31 treated patients.

^c^

Based on 12 naive and 27 treated patients.

TABLE 3

^a^

*P* values of \<0.05 are considered significant.

### Drug susceptibilities of V111I viruses.

The frequency at which V111I in HIV-2 RT is selected in patients failing
NRTI-based therapies suggests that it is involved in escape from drug
therapy. To determine its role, we introduced mutation V111I and the key
resistance mutations K65R, Q151M, and M184V into the HIV-2 subtype A
molecular clone pROD9 by site-directed mutagenesis. Subsequently, we
examined the individual and combined effects of V111I and these key
resistance mutations on NRTI sensitivity ( Table 4 ). Interestingly, no
significant effects of mutation V111I on NRTI sensitivity were measured.
Mutation Q151M mediated approximately 3-fold resistance to d4T, ABC, and
ddI and a high level of resistance to AZT (50-fold). Strikingly,
resistance to ABC and ddI was lost in the Q151M V111I combination.
Mutation M184V was found to confer high-level resistance to 3TC
(\>500-fold), also in combination with V111I. K65R was found to confer
modest levels of resistance to TDF and ddI and high-level resistance to
3TC (\>100-fold). Similar resistance levels were measured for the K65R
V111I combination, which in addition resulted in a 2.5-fold increase in
resistance to d4T compared to the wild-type virus. These combined
results suggest that mutation V111I does not strongly contribute to NRTI
resistance, as only a modest 3-fold resistance to d4T was measured in
combination with K65R.

TABLE 4

### Fitness of V111I viruses.

Pairwise competition experiments were performed to determine the
relative fitness of the V111I viruses. Therefore, the SupT1 T-cell line
was infected with equal amounts of two viruses. During prolonged
culturing of the mixtures, the HIV-2 strain with the best fitness
outcompetes the other virus. The frequencies of the two viruses were
assessed at several time points by population sequencing of the proviral
polymerase gene. Representative competitions between the wild-type ROD9
virus and V111I, K65R and K65R V111I, Q151M and Q151M V111I, and M184V
and M184 V111I were performed ( Fig. 1 ). Each competition experiment
was initiated at least three times with independent virus stocks and
produced the same result. The experiments showed that mutation V111I
resulted in a reduced replication capacity compared to the wild-type
virus ( Fig. 1A ). Reduced fitness was also measured for the V111I M184V
virus compared to the M184V virus ( Fig. 1B ). However, mutation V111
was found to increase the replication capacity of the K65R and Q151M
viruses ( Fig. 1C and D ).

FIG 1

### Structural changes mediated by V111I.

Position 111 is located in a loop comprised of residues 110 to 115 (
Fig. 2A ) in the palm region of the HIV-2 RT enzyme, very near the
polymerase active site (residues D110, D185, and D186). Unlike K65R and
Q151M, mutation V111I is not within the dNTP binding pocket and does not
interact with the template/primer directly. Consequently, any impact
upon RT activity and selectivity must be mediated through changes in
conformation or dynamics in adjacent regions of the RT structure. This
makes it an ideal candidate for investigation through molecular dynamics
simulations. Models of the wild-type and V111I RTs were constructed
using the Modeler package ( 25 ) and the only available crystal
structure of HIV-2 RT (PDB code 1MU2) ( 23 ). Five simulations producing
5 ns of sampled trajectory were performed, and changes in the palm
domain were analyzed. During most of the simulation time, both RT
enzymes were close to the average structure (data not shown). However,
during simulation of the wild-type RT, two different conformations of
the 110-to-115 loop were sampled, whereas only one conformation was
found for V111I RT. The two loop conformations are depicted in Fig. 2A .
These results suggest that replacement of valine at position 111 with
the bulkier isoleucine reduces the flexibility of the loop.

FIG 2

As the structure of the nucleic-acid-bound HIV-2 RT is not available,
the simulated structures were aligned to the closely related HIV-1 RT
bound to a DNA-DNA template-primer complex (PDB code 3KK2) ( 32 ) ( Fig.
2B ). The conformation of the 110-to-115 loop in this HIV-1 crystal
structure is similar to that in the HIV-2 crystal structure ( Fig. 2A
and B , pink loop). The loop is located near the polymerase active site
and the dNTP binding pocket. Interestingly, the second loop conformation
found for HIV-2 RT ( Fig. 2A , cyan loop) may block the dNTP binding
site. This loop conformation was not observed for V111I RT, suggesting
that the dNTP binding pocket may be more accessible in that mutant. We
also observed that the flexibility of the loop in wild-type simulations
is accompanied by motion of polymerase active site residue D185 away
from the position observed in the HIV-2 crystal structure ( Fig. 2C ).
This offers a second potential mechanism that could modulate the
polymerase activity of the V111I RT enzyme. Changes in the flexibility
of the 110-to-115 loop thus may affect the dNTP binding and catalytic
activity of the HIV-2 V111I RT enzyme.

### Effect of V111I on polymerase activity.

To characterize the effects of V111I on polymerase function, the
activities of the virion-derived RT enzymes were analyzed ( Fig. 3 ).
Therefore, viral lysates were generated, concentrated, and normalized
for the amount of infectious virus. We used an RNA template encompassing
the HIV-1 PBS region and a labeled DNA primer complementary to the PBS.
Minus-strand DNA synthesis was initiated by the addition of
virion-derived RT and dNTPs. Extension of the 21-nt primer resulted in
increasing amounts of the 202-nt labeled cDNA product over time for the
wild-type RT ( Fig. 3A , lanes 1 to 3). The amounts of cDNA products
generated by the different virion-derived RTs were quantified and are
plotted in Fig. 3B and D . The Q151M ( Fig. 3A , lanes 4 to 6) and K65R
(lanes 7 to 9) mutations were found to reduce the polymerase activity of
the HIV-2 RT enzyme. Surprisingly, V111I was found to increase the
polymerase activity approximately 4-fold (lanes 10 to 12) and restored
the reduced polymerase activity mediated by mutations Q151M and K65R
(lanes 13 to 15 and 17 to 19). The polymerase activity measured for
Q151M V111I and K65R V111I was increased 2-fold compared to the wild
type. Mutation M184V was also found to reduce polymerase activity ( Fig.
3C , lanes 4 and 5); however, V111I was unable to completely restore
this defect (lanes 10 to 12). Similar results were obtained using an
HIV-2 RNA template and primer complementary to the HIV-2 PBS (results
not shown).

FIG 3

### Effect of V111I on polymerase fidelity.

Molecular dynamics simulations suggest that substitution V111I may
affect nucleotide binding. To investigate the putative effects of V111I
on RT fidelity, we performed single-nucleotide incorporation assays to
measure site-specific misincorporation ( Fig. 4 ). The lack of
proofreading activity enables the analysis of fidelity without the
interference of exonuclease activity. We used an RNA template
encompassing the HIV-2 PBS region and a labeled DNA primer complementary
to the PBS. Virion-derived RT was added and incubated with increasing
concentrations of dATP as the correct nucleotide or dTTP as the
incorrect nucleotide. The kinetics of misincorporation were measured as
a function of increasing dNTP concentration, and the Michaelis constant
( *K ~m~* ) and maximum velocity ( *V* ~max~ ) for dNTP incorporation
were calculated. The insertion efficiency for the incorrect versus the
correct nucleotide provides the frequency of misincorporation ( Table 5
). We measured an approximately 9-fold increase in the frequency of
misincorporation for mutant V111I. The increase from 9 × 10 ^−4^ for the
wild type to 80 × 10 ^−4^ for V111I was mostly due to a change in *K
~m~* rather than *V* ~max~ . These results indicate that mutation V111I
reduces the fidelity of the HIV-2 RT enzyme.

FIG 4

TABLE 5

^a^

The Michaelis constant ( *K ~m~* ) and maximum velocity ( *V* ~max~ )
for the correct and incorrect dNTPs were determined from graphs in which
the rate of primer elongation (percent per minute) was plotted as a
function of the dNTP concentration. The results (± standard deviation)
from 3 independent experiments were quantified.

^b^

The ratio of the incorporation efficiency of the incorrect versus the
correct dNTP provides the frequency of misinsertion ( *F* ~ins~ )
(arbitrarily set at 1.0 for the correct nucleotide).

^c^

WT, wild type.

::: section

## DISCUSSION

Analysis of complete HIV-2 RT sequences showed that mutations K65R,
Q151M, and M184V are frequently selected in French HIV-2 patients
failing NRTI-containing therapies. These mutations were found to reduce
the incorporation of nucleotide analogues during reverse transcription
in both HIV-1 ( 33 ) and HIV-2 ( 18 ). Consistent with previous studies,
TAMs, which provide the principal route to NRTI resistance in HIV-1 by
the excision pathway, were observed only at very low frequencies in the
HIV-2 patients. It has been suggested that the mechanisms responsible
for NRTI resistance are different for HIV-1 and HIV-2 ( 16 , 17 ).
Diminished incorporation may play a more important role in HIV-2 than
selective excision of nucleotide analogues. In regard to the K65R
mutation, several clinical studies reported a high frequency of the
mutation in NRTI-treated patients infected with HIV-2 ( 13 , 14 ),
whereas in other studies K65R was rarely observed ( 34 -- 36 ). In
addition, *in vitro* , the selection of K65R in HIV-2 is not common ( 37
, 38 ). In this study, K65R was found in 40% of the treated patients.
The reasons for these differences in prevalence are unclear, but they
may reflect differences in the treatment regimen. In this study, the
HIV-2 patients were on treatment regimens containing 3TC (73%) and TDF
(24%), which are known to select for the K65R mutation. More studies are
needed to uncover the mechanism of K65R selection.

Besides these key resistance mutations, mutation V111I was identified in
the polymerase domain. Furthermore, polymorphism V356I in the connection
subdomain and I467V in the RNase H domain were found with increased
frequency in patients failing therapy. Several polymorphisms in the
connection subdomain of HIV-1 were previously found to contribute to
resistance ( 39 , 40 ). However, none of the connection subdomain
mutations found to contribute to NRTI resistance in HIV-1 (for a review,
see reference 21 ) were found in HIV-2 patients. In HIV-1, the mutations
in the connection subdomain are selected together with TAMs. The absence
of TAMs in HIV-2 patients failing therapy may restrict the selection of
connection subdomain mutations. The potential roles of polymorphisms
V356I and I467V in NRTI resistance in HIV-2 remain to be determined. The
selection of V111I in the polymerase domain of RT was found to be
associated with key resistance mutations K65R and Q151M. Analysis of
1,017 HIV-2 subtype A sequences deposited in the HIV Sequence Database
in Los Alamos showed that mutation V111I is present in 11% of the
sequences without key resistance mutation K65R, Q151M, or M184V.
However, V111I is found in 55% of the sequences containing Q151M and in
81% of the sequences containing K65R, whereas V111I is present in only
20% of the sequences with M184V. This analysis thus also suggests an
association between mutation V111I and mutations K65R and Q151M. In
HIV-1, the amino acid present at position 111 is also a valine. In the
Stanford database, a valine-to-isoleucine substitution at position 111
is found in approximately 1% of the HIV-1 isolates and appears to be
linked to NNRTI treatment. It is currently unknown if V111I plays a role
in the development of drug resistance in HIV-1.

In HIV-2 patients failing therapy, V111I was previously reported to be
coselected with mutation Q151M ( 14 , 15 , 20 ). Mutation Q151M alone
was suggested to confer resistance to d4T and ABC, whereas resistance to
other NRTIs would involve the coselection of V111I ( 20 ). However, a
previous *in vitro* study demonstrated that Q151M mediates resistance to
AZT, d4T, and ddI ( 18 ). Resistance to these NRTIs was also measured in
our study for Q151M. However, we also measured a 3-fold increase in the
IC ~50~ for ABC, whereas the 2-fold increase in the IC ~50~ in the
previous study did not reach statistical significance. Mutation M184V
provides high-level resistance to 3TC, and K65R provides resistance to
ddI, TDF, and 3TC. In the previous study ( 18 ), no increase in the IC
~50~ for TDF was measured for mutation K65R. This could be due to
differences in the assay used to determine drug susceptibility. Although
there was no evidence for ABC resistance mediated by K65R in these *in
vitro* studies, *in vivo* , the mutation was reported to be selected in
HIV-2-infected patients experiencing virological failure while receiving
an ABC-containing regimen ( 14 , 15 , 20 ). In both *in vitro* studies,
mutation K65R was introduced in the HIV-2 ROD9 background, which
suggests that variations or mutations present in the patient isolates
contribute to resistance mediated by the K65R mutation. We show that
mutation V111I alone does not affect drug susceptibility. In combination
with K65R, a modest 2.5-fold increase in resistance to d4T was measured.
Furthermore, V111I was found to reduce the resistance mediated by Q151M
to ddI (2.3-fold) and ABC (6.1-fold).

As mutation V111I was not found to strongly contribute to NRTI
resistance, we hypothesized that it may play a role in viral fitness by
enhancing the replication capacity of the resistant viruses. In HIV-1,
the mutations K65R, Q151M, and M184V were found to result in replication
defects. Mutation K65R reduces the replication capacity of HIV-1 in
T-cell lines and monocytes ( 41 , 42 ), whereas mutation M184V results
in reduced fitness in monocytes ( 43 , 44 ). Mutation Q151M does not
seem to reduce the HIV-1 replication capacity ( 45 , 46 ). However, the
acquisition of four additional mutations (A62V, V75I, F77L, and F116Y)
in the Q151M complex provides multidrug resistance and increases the
replication capacity of the Q151M virus ( 45 ). We therefore studied the
relative fitness of the HIV-2 V111I viruses in pairwise competition
assays ( Fig. 1 ). Mutation V111I reduced the fitness of the wild-type
and M184V viruses. Interestingly, V111I was found to increase the
replication capacity of the K65R and Q151M viruses. These results are
consistent with the fact that a strong association was found between
V111I and mutations K65R and Q151M in ARV-treated HIV-2 patients failing
therapy, whereas no association was found with mutation M184V ( Table 3
). Mutation V111I in HIV-2 thus enhances the replication capacity of the
K65R and Q151M viruses, like the additional mutations in the HIV-1 Q151M
complex. No compensatory mutations in HIV-1 have been reported that
restore the replication defect of the K65R virus.

Residue 111 in the HIV-2 RT enzyme is located near the polymerase active
site in a loop comprised of residues 110 to 115 ( Fig. 2 ). Molecular
dynamics simulations indicated that this loop is highly flexible in
wild-type RT, whereas its motion is constrained by the replacement of
valine with the bulkier isoleucine in the V111I mutant. Residue 111 is
not located within the dNTP binding pocket. However, using the
dNTP/DNA-bound HIV-1 RT as a model, we hypothesized that V111I does
affect dNTP binding. The highly flexible loop of the wild-type RT can
adopt a conformation that may block the dNTP binding pocket. This
conformation was not observed for V111I RT, suggesting that the dNTP
binding pocket of the mutant is more accessible. Moreover, the
flexibility of the loop in wild-type simulations was accompanied by
motion of polymerase active site residue D185 away from the position
observed in the crystal structure of HIV-2 RT. The position of D185 in
the HIV-2 crystal structure is similar to that in the dNTP/DNA-bound
HIV-1 RT and likely represents the catalytically competent conformation
of the polymerase active site. Movement of D185 away from this position
may be expected to reduce the polymerase activity of the enzyme. This
change in the position of D185 was not observed during simulations of
the V111I RT enzyme. The reduced flexibility of the 110-to-115 loop in
V111I RT thus may affect both dNTP binding and polymerase activity. In
agreement with this, both enhanced polymerase activity and reduced
fidelity were observed for the HIV-2 V111I RT enzyme in the biochemical
assays. Finally, V111I may affect the divalent metal binding at the dNTP
binding pocket. Complete insight into the structural changes induced by
V111I would therefore require modeling of not only dNTP and nucleic
acid, but also the metal ions chelated at the active site.

Polymerase assays were performed to study the polymerase activity of the
V111I RT enzyme and that of RT enzymes containing the key resistance
mutations. In HIV-1, mutations M184V, K65R, and Q151M were shown to
reduce the polymerase activity of the RT enzyme and increase the
fidelity of reverse transcription ( 41 , 47 -- 51 ). A previous study
showed that Q151M in the HIV-2 RT enzyme also results in reduced
polymerase activity ( 16 ). We demonstrated that Q151M, K65R, and M184V
severely reduce the polymerase activity of the HIV-2 RT enzyme.
Interestingly, mutation V111I resulted in a 4-fold increase in
polymerase activity. V111I was able to restore the polymerase activity
of K65R and Q151M mutants and partially restore that of M184V. We
subsequently studied the fidelity of *in vitro* DNA synthesis mediated
by the wild-type and V111I HIV-2 enzymes. The abilities of the RT
enzymes to incorporate one correct or incorrect nucleotide were
measured. The results indicated that the V111I mutant displayed an
approximately 9-fold-increased frequency of misinsertion compared to the
wild-type enzyme. This is largely attributable to a decrease in *K ~m~*
rather than a significant change in *V* ~max~ for V111I RT. These
results are in agreement with the molecular dynamics simulations, which
suggested that V111I results in a continuously accessible nucleotide
binding site and a catalytically competent conformation of the HIV-2 RT
enzyme.

Mutation V111I thus increases the polymerase activity but reduces the
fidelity of the HIV-2 RT enzyme. This may result in a higher error rate
during reverse transcription of the viral genome, which can be
deleterious to virus replication. In agreement with this hypothesis, the
V111I virus has a reduced replication capacity compared to the wild
type. However, V111I was found to restore the polymerase activity of
K65R and Q151M mutants and increase the replication capacity of these
viruses. The partial restoration of the polymerase activity of the M184V
mutant did not increase virus fitness, in agreement with the observation
that M184V V111I is not selected in HIV-2 patients failing therapy. In
HIV-1, mutations K65R and Q151M were found to increase the fidelity of
the RT enzyme, resulting in reduced incorporation of nucleotide
analogues. Therefore, the reduced fidelity mediated by V111I in HIV-2 RT
may be expected to reduce the resistance of the K65R and Q151M viruses.
Consistent with this, V111I was found to reduce the resistance to ddI
and ABC mediated by mutation Q151M. These results emphasize the complex
nature of HIV-2 resistance to NRTIs. The frequent selection of V111I in
clinical samples suggests that it contributes to an optimal balance
between replication efficiency and drug resistance in the K65R and Q151M
viruses.

::: section

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Robert Smith for the kind gift of the pROD9 molecular HIV-2
clone and Patrick Dekker for development of the CLCbio plug-in to
calculate relative peak heights in Sanger sequencing electropherograms.

The Ph.D. studentship of J.P. is funded by the Wellcome Trust. We
acknowledge the use of the UCL Legion High Performance Computing
Facility (Legion@UCL) and associated support services in the completion
of this work. This work made use of the facilities of HECToR, the United
Kingdom\'s national high-performance computing service, which is
provided by UoE HPCx Ltd. at the University of Edinburgh, Cray Inc., and
NAG Ltd. and funded by the Office of Science and Technology through
EPSRC\'s High End Computing Programme. D.W.W. acknowledges the support
provided by the 2020 Science program (EPSRC Cross-Disciplinary Interface
Programme grant number EP/I017909/1). This research project was funded
by EU FP7 CHAIN (HEALTH-2007 223131).

We thank all patients and investigators in the ANRS CO5 HIV-2 Cohort in
France: investigator coordinator, S. Matheron (Hôpital Bichat-Claude
Bernard, Paris); virological coordination, F. Brun-Vezinet, D. Descamps,
and F. Damond (Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris); methodological
coordination, G. Chêne, A. Bénard, and C. Roy (INSERM U897, Bordeaux);
immunological coordination, B. Autran (Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière,
Paris); clinical investigators, G. Pialoux and L. Slama (Tenon, Paris),
C. Duvivier (Necker, Paris), P. M. Girard, M. C. Meyohas, and P. Campa
(St-Antoine, Paris), D. Salmon (Cochin, Paris), J. F. Bergmann, P.
Sellier, and A. Durel (Lariboisiere, Paris), S. Matheron and P. Yéni
(Bichat, Paris), F. Bricaire and R. Tubiana (Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris),
F. Meier, E. Mortier, and B. Montoya (L. Mourier, Colombes), C. Perronne
and P. de Truchis (R. Poincaré, Garches), D. Mechali, M. A.
Khuong-Josse, T. Labergère, and B. Taverne (Delafontaine, Saint-Denis),
R. Dothe and P. Honoré-Berlureau (Avicenne, Bobigny), D. Vittecocoq and
E. Teichner (Paul Brousse, Paris), M. Janier and F. J. Timsit (St-Louis,
Paris), O. Fain and V. Jeantils (J. Verdier, Bondy), O. Patey and L.
Richier (Villeneuve St-Georges), C. Goujard (Bicêtre, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre), J. P. Fernand and L. Gérard (St-Louis, Paris), G. Cessot and
G. Palavan (Institut A. Fournier, Paris), E. Mortier (L. Mourier,
Colombes), F. David-Ouaknine and E. Froguel (Lagny-sur-Marne), P.
Mornet, Y. Welker, and B. Montoya (St-Germain-en-Laye), V. Daneluzzi (M.
Fourestier, Nanterre), L. Sutton and P. Genet (V. Dupouy, Argenteuil),
A. Leprêtre (Simone Veil, Eaubonne), O. Blétry, D. Zucman, and C.
Majerholc (Foch, Suresnes), D. Champetier de Ribes and G. Force
(Perpétuel Secours, Levallois), S. Herson and A. Coutelier
(Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris); P. Y. Redelsperger and N. Dupin (Cochin,
Paris), L. Weiss (HEGP, Paris), I. de Lacroix, V. Garrait, and L.
Richier (Intercommunal, Créteil), C. Veyssier-Belot, H. Masson, and F.
Cordier (Poissy), L. Blum (Pontoise), J. D. Lelièvre (H. Mondor,
Créteil), A. Dulioust (CMC de Bligny, Briis-sous-Forges), F. Granier and
V. Perronne (F. Quesnay, Mantes-la-Jolie), L. Capron (HEGP, Paris), C.
Winter (Intercommunal, Montreuil), I. La Torre (Montargis); J. M. Zini
(Lariboisière, Paris), J. M. Molina (St-Louis, Paris), K. Giry
(Arpajon), B. Godeau (H. Mondor, Créteil), A. Devidas, (Corbeil), C
Dupont (A. Paré, Boulogne), S. Kernbaum (Hôpital Américain, Neuilly), C.
Duvivier (Institut Pasteur, Paris), B. Redouanr and J. L. Delassus (R.
Balanger, Aulnay), M. Gayraud and L. Bodard (Institut Mutualiste
Montsouris, Paris), D. Israël-Biet (HEGP, Paris), T. Debord and C. Rapp
(Bégin, St-Mandé), F. Boué (A. Béclère, Clamard), B. Fantin and A.
Uludag (Beaujon, Clichy), F. Chaix (CH Général, Longjumeau), O. Bouchaud
(Avicenne, Bobigny), A. Compagnucci (Hotel Dieu, Paris), K. Asselah and
M. Bary (Henry Dunant, Paris), J. P. Viard and J. Gilquin (Hotel Dieu,
Paris), A. Greder-Belan (André Mignot, Versailles), M. Galfossé (René
Arbeltier, Coulommiers), J. G. Fuzibet and C. Ceppi (Archet, Nice), M.
Roger and J. M. Bressieux (Hauts Clos, Troyes), G. Beck-Wirth
(Mulhouse), F. Raffi (Hotel Dieu, Nantes), B. Hoen and C. Drobacheff
(St-Jacques, Besançon), J. Koffi, L. Cotte, and C. Brochier (Hotel-Dieu,
Lyon), A. P. Blanc and T. Allègre (Aix-en-Provence), R. Verdon (Caen),
C. Debreux (St Marguerite, Marseille), C. Beuscart, C. Daniel, and
Sylvie Le Mal (Saint-Brieuc), D. Merrien (Compiègne), P. Granier
(Fleyriat, Bourg-en-Bresse), L. Bernard (CH Tours), Y. Debab (C.
Nicolle, Rouen), P. Leclerc (Michalon, Grenoble), J. Julien (J. Coeur,
Bourges), J. Moreau and P. Brouqui (Nord, Marseille), C. Arvieux
(Pontchaillou, Rennes), J. M. Livrozet (E. Herriot, Lyon), B. Héry
(St-Nazaire), P. Roblot and G. Le Moal (Poitiers), P. Arsac (Régional,
Orléans), A. Lafeuillade (Chalucet, Toulon), J. M. Ragnaud
(Pellegrin-Tripode, Bordeaux), B. Martha (W. Morey, Chalon-sur-Saône),
P. Perré (La Roche sur Yon), P Morlat (St André, Bordeaux), E Brothier
(la Rochelle), D. Neau and M. Dupon (Pellegrin-Tripode, Bordeaux), J. L.
Pellegrin (Haut-Lévêque, Bordeaux Pessac), N. Montagne and B. Vialatte
(Cannes), T. May (Nancy Brabois, Vandoeuvre les Nancy), M. C. Gemain (CH
de Bayonne), B. Manoury (St-Quentin), J. Reynes (Montpellier), J. L.
Schmit (Amit ens-Nord, Amiens), C. Rouger (R. Debré, Reims), Y.
Poinsignon (P. Chubert, Vannes), C. Jacomet (Hotel-Dieu, Clermont
Ferrand), L. Piroth (Bocage, Dijon), E. Rosenthal and A. Naqvi (Archet,
Nice), S. Bonne (Dron, Tourcoing), A. Riché (Angoulême), F. Gaches and
D. Garipuy (J. Ducuing, Toulouse), R. Viraben and F. Lucas (Hôpital de
la Grave, Toulouse), I. Perbost and A. Naqvi (Archet, Nice), J. Gaillat
(CH Annecy), D. Rey (CISIH Strasbourg), J. F. Abino (CH Ajaccio), M.
Longy-Boursier (St André, Bordeaux), P. M. Roger (Draguignan), J. M.
Chennebault and S. Rehaiem (Angers), D. Liné (Soissons), A. Arnaud
(Caremeau, Nîmes), N. Randrianasolo (Chaumont), P. Granet (CH,
Dignes-les-Bains), P Lhoste (Dax), J. Boileau (Morlaix), and P. Perfezou
(Quimper); biologist and virological investigators, F. Brun-Vézinet and
F. Damond (Bichat, Paris), F. Simon (St-Louis, Paris), L. Morand-Joubert
(St-Antoine, Paris), D. Cottalorda (F. de Médecine, Nice), J. M.
Delarbre (Mulhouse), V. Ferre (Institut de Biologie, Nantes), D.
Bettinger (Besançon), P. Barin (Bretonneau, Tours), T. T. Le Thi
(Université, Lyon), E. Lagier (Aix-en-Provence), A. Vabret (Caen), C.
Tamalet (Sainte Marguerite, Marseille), C. Espanel (Compiegne), P.
Guinot (Bourg-en-Bresse), J. Izopet and F. Nicot (Purpan, Toulouse), D.
Barin (Tours), J. C. Plantier (C. Nicolle, Rouen), A. Signoris-Schmuck
(Grenoble), N. Tivoli (La Timone, Marseille), A. Maillard (Pontchaillou,
Rennes), S. Sachot-Ollivier (Saint Nazaire), P. Agius and G. Giraudeau
(Poitiers), C. Poggi and M. Chouraqui (Centre Intercommunal, Toulon), P.
Fleury (Pellegrin-Tripode, Bordeaux), B. Martha and A. Goux
(Chalon-sur-Soane), A. S. Poirier (LaRoche-Sur-Yon), M. Marty (La
Rochelle), V. Vénard (Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy), M. C. Gemain (Bayonne),
M.T. Albertini (Saint Quentin), B. Montes (St-Eloi, Montpellier), C.
Segard (Amiens), V. Brodart (Reims), P. Pouedras (Vannes), C. Regagnon
(Clermond-Ferrand), J. B. Bourg (Dijon), L. Bocket (Lille), B. Chanzy
(Pringy), E. Schvoerer (Nancy), P. Valayer (Ajaccio), C. Bouquigny
(Soissons), M. J. Carles (Nimes), C. Alba-Sauviat (Chaumont), and N.
Azencott (Dignes-les-Bains); data management and statistical analysis,
N. Chaghil-Boissière, A. Taieb, and D. Touchard.

::: section

## Fig 1

FIG 1 Relative fitness of wild-type (WT) and mutant viruses. The SupT1 T-cell line was infected with equal amounts of two viruses, and the frequencies of the viral genotypes were assessed at each passage by population sequencing of the RT gene. The percentage of each virus in the population was calculated from the Sanger sequencing electropherograms. Shown are pairwise competition experiments between the wild-type and V111I (A), M184V and M184V V111I (B), K65R and K65R V111 (C), and Q151M and Q151M V111I (D) viruses. All experiments were repeated at least three times, and representative experiments are shown.


## Fig 2

FIG 2 Molecular dynamics simulations of the wild-type and V111I HIV-2 RT enzymes. (A) Crystal structure of the polymerase domain of HIV-2 RT, with the palm (yellow), thumb (red), and fingers (blue) subdomains. The position of the 110-to-115 loop is shown in pink. The second loop conformation, observed only during simulations of the wild-type RT, is shown in cyan. The location of residue 111 within the loop is indicated by a sphere (placed on the carbon alpha atom). The location of residue D185 in the polymerase active site is marked by a black sphere. (B) Structure of HIV-1 RT bound to DNA/dATP (PDB code 3KK2) indicating the location of the dNTP binding pocket relative to the polymerase active site (which is highly conserved between HIV-1 and HIV-2). The subdomain coloring and orientation are the same as for HIV-2 RT; DNA is shown in light blue, and dATP in green. (C) The RMSD of the 110-to-115 loop plotted against the RMSD of residue D185 in the polymerase active site over the simulations (relative to the position in the HIV-2 crystal structure). Two conformations of the 110-to-115 loop are observed for wild-type RT (red), whereas only a single cluster of values is observed for V111I RT (black). The flexibility of the loop is associated with displacement of catalytic residue D185 in the wild-type simulations.


## Fig 3

FIG 3 Polymerase activities of wild-type and mutant virus-derived HIV-2 RT enzymes. (A) The polymerase activities of the wild-type, Q151M, K65R, V111I, Q151M V111I, and K65R V111I HIV-2 RT enzymes were determined using an HIV-1 RNA template and an end-labeled DNA primer complementary to the PBS. The primer was heat annealed onto the template and extended by the addition of virion-derived RT and dNTPs. Formation of the 202-nt cDNA product (cDNA) was monitored after 30, 60, and 120 min of incubation time (t). Increasing incubation time is marked by a triangle. A DNA size marker (M) was loaded as a reference (nt). Similar results were obtained in at least three independent experiments. (B) The amount of cDNA production was quantified, and the polymerase activity of the wild-type virus-derived RT was set at 100%. (C) Polymerase activities of wild-type M184V, V111I, and M184V V111I virus-derived RT enzymes. (D) Quantification of the cDNA products, with the activity of wild-type RT set at 100%. Representative gels are shown, and similar results were obtained in at least two independent experiments and were repeated using HIV-2 RNA templates.


## Fig 4

FIG 4 Fidelity of the wild-type and V111I HIV-2 RT enzymes. (A) Single-nucleotide incorporation assays were performed using an RNA template encompassing the HIV-2 PBS region and a labeled DNA primer complementary to the PBS. Virion-derived wild-type or V111I RT was added and incubated with increasing concentrations of dATP as the correct nucleotide or dTTP as the incorrect nucleotide (marked by triangles). Single-nucleotide incorporation was quantified in three independent experiments ( Table 5 ).


**Fig. 1 not found**

**Fig. 2 not found**

**Fig. 3 not found**

**Fig. 4 not found**



## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Table 2

**Table 2 not found**

## Table 3

**Table 3 not found**

## Table 4

**Table 4 not found**

## Table 5

**Table 5 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th>    Characteristic    <sup>     a    </sup></th><th>    Value   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Women [   n   (%)]  </td><td>   28 (52)  </td></tr><tr><td>   Age [median yr (IQR)]  </td><td>   45 (37–53)  </td></tr><tr><td>   ARV treatment [   n   (%)]  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   No  </td><td>   19 (35)  </td></tr><tr><td>   Yes  </td><td>   35 (65)  </td></tr><tr><td>   ARV-naive patients  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   HIV-2 RNA load [median log   <sub>    10   </sub>   copies/ml (IQR) in patients with detectable viremia (&gt;100 copies/ml) (   n   = 19)]  </td><td>   4.00 (3.51–4.19)  </td></tr><tr><td>   ARV-treated patients  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   HIV-2 RNA load [median log   <sub>    10   </sub>   copies/ml (IQR) in patients with detectable viremia (&gt;100 copies/ml) (   n   = 35)]  </td><td>   3.98 (3.47–4.59)  </td></tr><tr><td>   Duration of NRTI exposure [median mo (IQR)]  </td><td>   40 (6–184)  </td></tr><tr><td>   ARV treatment at time of sampling [   n   (%)]  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   2 NRTIs + 1 PI/r  </td><td>   19  </td></tr><tr><td>   3 NRTIs  </td><td>   10  </td></tr><tr><td>   3 NRTIs + 1 PI/r  </td><td>   6  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="2">    Mutation   </th><th colspan="2">    HIV-2 patients [no. (%)] positive   </th><th rowspan="2">    Significance (    P    value    <sup>     a    </sup>    )   </th></tr><tr><th>    Naïve (    n    = 19)   </th><th>    Treated (    n    = 35)   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Polymerase domain  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   M184V  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td>   18 (51)  </td><td>   0.0001  </td></tr><tr><td>   V111I  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td>   15 (43)  </td><td>   0.0004  </td></tr><tr><td>   K65R  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td>   14 (40)  </td><td>   0.0009  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q151M  </td><td>   0 (0)  </td><td>   10 (29)  </td><td>   0.0097  </td></tr><tr><td>   Connection domain  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   V356I   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   7 (47)  </td><td>   24 (77)  </td><td>   0.0497  </td></tr><tr><td>   RNaseH  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   I467V   <sup>    c   </sup></td><td>   8 (58)  </td><td>   25 (93)  </td><td>   0.0197  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 2

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="2">    Mutation   </th><th colspan="2">    Association (no. of patients)   </th><th rowspan="2">    P    value    <sup>     a    </sup></th></tr><tr><th>    V111   </th><th>    I111   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   K65R  </td><td>   14  </td><td>   86  </td><td>   0.0001  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q151M  </td><td>   27  </td><td>   73  </td><td>   0.0271  </td></tr><tr><td>   M184V  </td><td>   61  </td><td>   39  </td><td>   0.7380  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 3

<table><thead><tr><th>    HIV-2 RT   </th><th>    dNTP   </th><th>    V    <sub>     max    </sub>    (%/min)   </th><th>    K    <sub>     m    </sub>    (μM)   </th><th>    F    <sub>     ins    </sub><sup>     b    </sup></th></tr></thead><tr><td>   WT   <sup>    c   </sup></td><td>   Correct  </td><td>   13.68 ± 0.14  </td><td>   0.04 ± 0.00  </td><td>   1  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   Incorrect  </td><td>   10.26 ± 0.06  </td><td>   34.01 ± 2.45  </td><td>   8.94 × 10   <sup>    −4   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   V111I  </td><td>   Correct  </td><td>   12.78 ± 045  </td><td>   0.04 ± 0.00  </td><td>   1  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   Incorrect  </td><td>   10.82 ± 0.65  </td><td>   4.24 ± 0.10  </td><td>   79.8 × 10   <sup>    −4   </sup></td></tr></table>



