## Fig 1

FIG 1 In vitro selection of INSTI-resistant HIV-1 mutants. HIV-1 NL432 wild type or mutants with the E92Q, N155H, Q148K, Q148R, Q148H, Y143C, or Y143R substitution were propagated in MT-2 cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of INSTIs. The highest concentrations of INSTIs at which the virus could replicate in cultured wells were plotted. The y axis shows the drug concentration (nM), and the x axis shows the days of culture. The genotypes of virus selected the first time at defined time points are indicated in the balloons. Detailed genotype analyses are shown in Table 1 . (a) Resistant selection with DTG at initial concentrations of 160 nM (open circles), 32 nM (gray circles), and 6.4 nM (black circles). (b) Resistant selection with RAL at initial concentrations of 160 nM (white triangles), 32 nM (gray triangles), and 6.4 nM (black triangles). (c) Resistant selection with EVG at initial concentrations of 160 nM (white squares), 32 nM (gray squares), and 6.4 nM (black squares).


## Fig 2

FIG 2 Relative infectivities in HeLa-CD4 assay of mutant viruses observed in this study. Each bar represents the mean from three to five independent experiments. The error bars represent standard deviations. Student's t test was used for statistical analysis, and the P values are shown.


## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 , and the results of genotype assay at each time point are shown in Table 1 .


## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 show the viral replication for each drug concentration. Viral replication was detected at all concentrations of RAL and EVG and in every strain, except for wild-type NL432 in both drugs at a concentration of 160 nM. The concentrations of RAL or EVG were able to be increased and emerging IN-resistant mutants allowed to replicate at up to 800 or 4,000 nM, respectively. In contrast, no viral replication was detected with an initial exposure to 32 nM or 160 nM DTG in the wild-type NL432 virus and all mutant viruses. When initially exposed to 6.4 nM DTG, the viruses were able to replicate, but if the DTG concentration was increased during the passage at or beyond 160 nM, complete viral suppression occurred.


**Fig. 2 not found**

