# Evaluation of the Genotypic Prediction of HIV-1 Coreceptor Use versus a Phenotypic Assay and Correlation with the Virological Response to Maraviroc: the ANRS GenoTropism Study ^▿^


## Abstract

Genotypic algorithms for prediction of HIV-1 coreceptor usage need to be evaluated in a clinical setting. We aimed at studying (i) the correlation of genotypic prediction of coreceptor use in comparison with a phenotypic assay and (ii) the relationship between genotypic prediction of coreceptor use at baseline and the virological response (VR) to a therapy including maraviroc (MVC). Antiretroviral-experienced patients were included in the MVC Expanded Access Program if they had an R5 screening result with Trofile (Monogram Biosciences). V3 loop sequences were determined at screening, and coreceptor use was predicted using 13 genotypic algorithms or combinations of algorithms. Genotypic predictions were compared to Trofile; dual or mixed (D/M) variants were considered as X4 variants. Both genotypic and phenotypic results were obtained for 189 patients at screening, with 54 isolates scored as X4 or D/M and 135 scored as R5 with Trofile. The highest sensitivity (59.3%) for detection of X4 was obtained with the Geno2pheno algorithm, with a false-positive rate set up at 10% (Geno2pheno10). In the 112 patients receiving MVC, a plasma viral RNA load of \<50 copies/ml was obtained in 68% of cases at month 6. In multivariate analysis, the prediction of the X4 genotype at baseline with the Geno2pheno10 algorithm including baseline viral load and CD4 nadir was independently associated with a worse VR at months 1 and 3. The baseline weighted genotypic sensitivity score was associated with VR at month 6. There were strong arguments in favor of using genotypic coreceptor use assays for determining which patients would respond to CCR5 antagonist.



## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Study population.

The patients included in this study were screened for the Maraviroc
Expanded Access Program (MVC EAP) in France between January, 2007 and
August 2008 and received MVC associated with an optimized background
therapy if the result of the phenotypic assay for coreceptor use
determination was CCR5, using a previously validated assay (Trofile;
Monogram Biosciences) ( 18 ). For the last group of patients included, a
modified version with an optimized sensitivity of the assay was
performed ( 16 ). All screened patients were included in the
genotype-phenotype comparison, whereas only patients treated with MVC
were included in the study correlating VR to the genotypic results.

Inclusion criteria for the MVC EAP were HIV-1 infection, ≥18 years of
age, previous antiretroviral therapy, and virological failure with a
plasma HIV-1 RNA load of \>1,000 copies/ml. The patients were included
in the GenoTropism Study in 18 participating centers in France.
Sociodemographic data, clinical data, and treatment histories were
collected for all enrolled patients at the screening date. MVC-treated
patients were followed up at baseline (month 0 \[M0\]) and at months 1,
3, and 6 (M1, M3, and M6, respectively) on MVC-containing regimens. The
patients had signed the MVC EAP informed consent form and were
specifically informed about their participation in the GenoTropism
Study. The study was approved by the Comité Consultatif de Traitement de
l\'Information dans la Recherche Scientifique et Médicale and the
Commission Nationale Informatique et Libertés.

### Virological methods. (i) gp120 sequence analysis and genotypic prediction of coreceptor use.

The gp120 sequence analysis comprising the complete V3 loop sequence was
performed from plasma sampled at the date of screening of the MVC EAP,
when a sample was also sent for the Trofile assay. PCR primers and
conditions and sequencing primers are described in the ANRS (Agence
Nationale de Recherches sur le SIDA et les Hépatites Virales, Paris,
France) consensus techniques ( http://www.hivfrenchresistance.org ). The
bulk V3 sequences were determined by all participant laboratories.
Sequences in the FASTA format including possibilities of mixed
populations were sent to a central laboratory, where all possible
combinations of V3 amino acid sequences present as a result of
nucleotide mixtures were considered.

The V3 sequences were then interpreted using 13 different bioinformatics
predictors of coreceptor use. The bioinformatic tools C4.5, C4.5 with
p8-p12, PART, SVM, and Charge Rule are available at
http://genomiac2.ucsd.edu:8080/wetcat/v3.html ; PSSM ~R5X4~ and PSSM
~SINSI~ are available at
http://indra.mullins.microbiol.washington.edu/pssm . Geno2pheno is
available at http://coreceptor.bioinf.mpi-inf.mpg.de/index.php . For
PSSM, the coreceptor use prediction was based on subtype B. For the
Geno2pheno website, the false-positive rates (FPRs) for prediction of X4
variants were 5% or 10%. The Geno2pheno interpretation was made with the
"clonal" data set (only using bulk sequence analysis) with FPRs of 5%
(Geno2pheno5) and 10% (Geno2pheno10) and with the "clinical" data set
with an FPR of 10% (Geno2pheno10Clin). In the latter case, the CD4 nadir
value, when available, and the viral load at screening were also taken
into account.

Finally, three combinations of algorithms were also tested, by scoring
X4 when the prediction was X4 with any algorithm: PSSM ~R5X4~ with a
Geno2pheno FPR of 5% or 10% or all available online algorithms. In all
cases, HIV-1 isolates were classified as R5- or X4-tropic, with the
latter including pure X4 and mixed R5 and/or X4 isolates on the basis of
the analysis of multiple genotypic populations.

### (ii) Genotypic resistance analysis and GSS.

Sequences of the protease and reverse transcriptase (RT) genes were
determined at baseline MVC in each laboratory using the ANRS consensus
technique, ( http://www.hivfrenchresistance.org ), the Siemens TruGene
kit, and the Abbott ViroSeq kit or an in-house method. The genotypic
resistance analysis was interpreted using the ANRS algorithm, as updated
in July 2008 ( http://www.hivfrenchresistance.org ). The weighted
genotypic sensitivity score (wGSS) was calculated as previously reported
(C. Boucher, J. M. Schapiro, D. R. Kuritzkes, J. M. Llibre, M. Lewis, P.
Simpson, C. Delogne, V. Sharma, A. Parliyan, D. Chapman, M. Perros, H.
Valdez, and M. Westby, presented at the XVIII International HIV Drug
Resistance workshop, Fort Myers, FL, 2009). Briefly, one nucleoside RT
inhibitor was scored as 0.5 when the virus was sensitive and 0 when the
virus was possibly resistant or resistant. A nonnucleoside RT inhibitor,
a fusion inhibitor (enfuvirtide), or an integrase inhibitor
(raltegravir) was scored as 1 when the virus was sensitive and 0 when
the virus was resistant or possibly resistant. A boosted protease
inhibitor was scored as 1 when the virus was sensitive, 0.5 when the
virus was possibly resistant, and 0 when the virus was resistant. The
wGSS was the sum of the scores obtained for the drugs coprescribed with
MVC.

### (iii) HIV-1 subtype analysis.

HIV-1 subtype was determined by phylogenetic analysis of RT and gp120
sequences. The nucleotide sequences were aligned by ClustalW1.74 with
known reference strains of groups M, N, and O (
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/hiv-db/SUBTYPE_REF/align.html ).
Phylogenetic trees were inferred using the neighbor-joining method and
two Kimura parameters with 1,000 bootstrap values.

### (iv) Statistical analyses.

The first part of the study was performed to correlate HIV-1 coreceptor
use results between the Trofile assay and different genotypic
algorithms, while the second part was performed to determine the factors
associated with VR to MVC in patients receiving an MVC-containing
regimen on the basis of the Trofile assay. The sensitivity and
specificity for predicting CXCR4 were computed for patients included in
the first part of our study.

Three virologic responses were defined at three distinct time points. VR
was defined as a reduction of at least 1 log ~10~ copy/ml and/or an HIV
RNA level of \<50 copies/ml at month 1 (M1), a reduction of at least 1.5
log ~10~ copies/ml and/or an HIV-RNA level of \<50 copies/ml at M2, and
an HIV RNA level of \<50 copies/ml at M6. The impact of baseline HIV
RNA, baseline CD4 cell count, nadir CD4 cell count, wGSS, and genotypic
predictions of CXCR4 on the VR to MVC was investigated. A logistic
regression model was performed to search for independent predictive
factors associated with VR to MVC. A stepwise selection procedure was
used to build final multivariate models.

### Nucleotide sequence accession numbers.

The reverse transcriptase, protease, and gp120 sequences from the
patients in this study were given GenBank accession no. HM035546 to
HM035976 .



## RESULTS

### Study population.

The study design is described in Fig. ​ Fig.1. 1 . During the screening
period, 236 patients were screened for the MVC EAP, and corresponding
plasma samples were sent for the Trofile assay. The Trofile results were
nonreportable for 19 patients and were thus available for 217 patients.
Within these 217 patients, 28 patients had no gp120 sequence
determination, because of nonavailability of plasma sample or failure of
PCR amplification. Thus, 189 patients had both Trofile and gp120
sequence determination and were included in the study comparing
genotypic and phenotypic determinations of coreceptor use. Within these
189 patients, 165 had the standard Trofile assay and 24 had the
enhanced-sensitivity assay.

FIG. 1.

Study design.

Within these 189 patients, 54 had a Trofile result of X4 or dual or
mixed (D/M) and 135 were scored as R5 with Trofile and were treated with
MVC. The correlation between VR and MVC and the baseline genotypic
parameters was assessed in 112 patients with available follow-up. The
patients\' characteristics at screening and at baseline MVC appear in
Table ​ Table1. 1 . The median CD4 cell count was 213 (interquartile
range \[IQR\], 92 to 345) in patients with a Trofile result of X4 or D/M
compared with 267 (IQR, 121 to 417) in patients with an R5 result
(Wilcoxon test, *P* = 0.05). The median GSS was 1 (IQR, 0 to 1). The
percentage of patients with GSS at 0 or 0.5 was 34%, while 44% of
patients had a GSS of 1, and 22% of patients had a GSS of 1.5. The nadir
of the CD4 cell count was missing for 42 and 26 patients, respectively,
among the 189 and 112 patients presented in Table ​ Table1 1 .


### Correlation between phenotypic and genotypic predictions of coreceptor use.

The V3 loop sequence enabled the prediction of HIV-1 coreceptor use
according to 14 genotypic algorithms or combinations of algorithms in
189 patients. The sensitivity and specificity of the prediction of X4
tropism in comparison with Trofile appear in Fig. ​ Fig.2 2 for the
different algorithms. The highest sensitivity for individual algorithms
was obtained with Geno2pheno at a 10% FPR using either the "clonal" or
the "clinical" data set (both sensitivities of 59.3%). No increase in
sensitivity was obtained when combining both Geno2pheno and PSSM
algorithms. A high sensitivity (78.8%) was obtained with the global
combination of all individual algorithms for the prediction of X4
viruses.

FIG. 2.

Sensitivity and specificity of the detection of X4 or dual/mixed
isolates according to 14 genotypic algorithms or combinations of
algorithms compared to Trofile ( *n* = 189 patients). Geno2pheno5 and
Geno 2pheno10, Geno2pheno algorithms with a false-positive rate set up
at 10% or 5%, respectively; Geno2pheno10Clinic, Geno2pheno10 with
"clinical" parameters (baseline HIV-1 RNA and nadir CD4 ^+^ cell count);
Geno5PSSM or Geno10PSSM, combinations of Geno2pheno and PSSM algorithms;
global, combination of all individual algorithms for detection of X4 or
dual/mixed isolates.

The specificity of the detection of X4 in comparison with Trofile was
high (79.3% to 98.5%) for all individual algorithms or dual combinations
of algorithms. A decrease of specificity (62.9%) was observed with the
global combination of individual algorithms.

### Virological and immunological responses to MVC.

The VR to MVC was studied at M1, M3, and M6. The VR at M1 was obtained
in 94/111 (85%) patients, the VR at M3 was obtained in 88/105 (84%)
patients, and the VR at M6 was reached in 67/98 (68%) patients. At M6,
the median decrease in plasma HIV-1 RNA was −2.34 log ~10~ copies/ml
(IQR, −1.35 to −2.97) and the median increase in CD4 ^+^ cells was 81
cells/μl (IQR, 25 to 180).

### Association between genotypic prediction of coreceptor use and virological response.

The association between the genotypic prediction of coreceptor use and
the VR to MVC plus optimized background therapy (OBT) was studied at M1,
M3, and M6, by using the different genotypic algorithms or combinations
of algorithms. The percentage of prediction of X4 tropism in the 112
studied patients with an R5 result with the phenotypic assay comprised
between 2% and 21%, according to the different interpretation systems.
Significant associations between genotypic coreceptor use and VR ( *P*
\< 0.05) or trends ( *P* \< 0.2) are shown in Fig. ​ Fig.3. 3 . The
percentage of VR was significantly higher in patients with baseline R5
according to the Geno2pheno10 algorithm with a clinical data set
(Geno2pheno10Clin) at M1, M3, and M6. There was a trend toward
association with VR for Geno2pheno5 plus PSSM ~R5X4~ (Geno2pheno5+PSSM)
and Geno2pheno10 plus PSSM ~R5X4~ (Geno2pheno10+PSSM) at M1 and M6,
respectively.

FIG. 3.

Virological response to maraviroc-based regimens according to the
baseline HIV-1 coreceptor use predicted by different genotypic
algorithms ( *n* = 112 patients). Geno10clin, Geno2pheno algorithm with
false-positive rate set at 10% and with "clinical" parameters (baseline
HIV-1 RNA and nadir CD4 ^+^ cell count); Geno5PSSM or Geno10PSSM,
combinations of Geno2pheno (with false-positive rates set at 5% or 10%)
and PSSM algorithms; M1, M2, and M3, date (in months) of follow-up.

### Baseline V3 loop mutations and virological response to MVC.

The gp120 V3 loop amino acid substitutions were determined before
treatment with MVC. Particular amino acid patterns, previously reported
to be associated with phenotypic resistance to MVC and which had been
shown to be polymorphic in MVC-naïve patients ( 15 ), were investigated.
The prevalences of the different patterns were as follows: 11S plus 26V,
7.5%; 18G plus 22T, 1.0%; 19S plus 26V, 1.0%; 20F plus 25D plus 26V,
3.0%; 20F plus 21I, 0.5%; and 21T plus 28V, 0%. No significant
association between the presence of these patterns at baseline and the
subsequent VR to MVC-based regimens could be evidenced. We also searched
for an association between all individual baseline V3 loop polymorphisms
and VR; no significant association was found (data not shown).

### Multivariate analysis of the factors associated with VR to MVC.

In the univariate analysis (Table ​ (Table2), 2 ), the baseline
coreceptor use prediction with Geno2pheno10Clin algorithm was at each
time of follow-up was significantly associated with the VR to MVC. The
nadir of CD4 cell count, the baseline of HIV RNA, wGSS (in which a wGSS
of ≥1 was associated with a better VR), and the coreceptor use
prediction with Geno2pheno5 plus PSSM were at some points of follow-up
associated with the VR to MVC. As mentioned previously, information on
the nadir of CD4 cell count is missing in 26 (23%) out of the 112
patients included in this analysis. We then built multivariate models
with and without inclusion of the nadir variable in the stepwise
selection procedure for each VR.

The multivariate logistic model without inclusion of the CD4 cell count
nadir in the stepwise selection procedure retained only one variable for
each distinct follow-up. Including the CD4 cell count nadir, no
variables were retained in the association with VR at both month 1 and
month 3. At month 6, a lower baseline HIV RNA, a wGSS of ≥1, and a
higher CD4 cell count nadir were independently associated with VR to
MVC.



## DISCUSSION

In the setting of the treatment of HIV-1 infection by CCR5 inhibitors,
the possibility to use accurate and clinically validated tests for
prediction of HIV-1 coreceptor use has become a priority. In this
multicenter prospective study, we could evaluate the performance of
genotypic tools in comparison with a phenotypic assay for the
determination of coreceptor usage. Furthermore, we could study the
relationship between the baseline genotype-predicted coreceptor use and
the VR to MVC in antiretroviral-experienced patients.

We compared the prediction of coreceptor use by 13 different genotypic
algorithms or combinations of algorithms with the Trofile phenotypic
assay considered as the reference. We could show important differences
between algorithms in the sensitivity of detection of X4 isolates. The
most sensitive bioinformatic tools were PSSM and Geno2pheno, with
sensitivities at about 60%. We found no evidence of increased
sensitivity by combining these two algorithms for the detection of X4.
In contrast, the specificity of the predicted X4 tropism was high for
most algorithms. Similar performances of genotypic prediction compared
to the standard Trofile assay have been reported after analysis of the
MOTIVATE-1 Study database (P. R. Harrigan, R. McGovern, W. Dong, L.
Swenson, A. Thielen, M. Jensen, T. Mo, D. Chapman, M. Lewis, I. James,
J. Heera, S. Ellery, and H. Valdez, presented at the 5th IAS Conference
on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention, CapeTown, South Africa,
2009). However, in other studies comparing phenotypic and genotypic
predictions of coreceptor use, higher sensitivities of genotypic
algorithms could be found ( 3 , 13 ). Several factors can explain this
somewhat low sensitivity of bioinformatic tools for the detection of X4
in our study. First, in our patients the percentage of X4 or D/M
isolates at screening was quite low (28.8%), and higher sensitivities
could have been found with a less rare X4-D/M event. Second, the
sequences generated for genotypic analysis and for the Trofile assay
corresponded to different PCR assays, which could have created some
discrepancy; our study was a prospective, multicentric study, certainly
more likely to evaluate the use of genotypic tools in routine diagnosis
than monocentric studies on selected samples. Third, a minority of
patients (24/189) had a Trofile assay of the enhanced-sensitivity
version, which could have resulted in a better sensitivity than
genotypic tests for detecting X4 isolates. However, no higher
sensitivities of genotypic tests were found when considering only
patients who had the standard Trofile assay. Fourth, considering the
median viral load, the input copy number was relatively high in this
study. However, it could be a limitation for the representation of viral
diversity in patients with low viral load. Additional studies including
the use of the triplicate versus single PCR and sequence are warranted
in this setting. Finally, further development of bioinformatic tools,
including the analysis of viral determinants of coreceptor use outside
of the V3 loop, could improve their sensitivity in the future.

Another important result of our study is the association between
genotypic prediction of coreceptor use and VR to MVC-based regimens. We
could show that the Geno2pheno algorithm using "clinical" parameters
(baseline viral load and nadir of CD4 ^+^ cell count) in addition to the
gp120 V3 loop sequence for predicting coreceptor use, could be
predictive of the VR to MVC. The association between a better VR at
months 1 and 3 on MVC and a predicted R5 coreceptor use was conserved in
multivariate models which showed that a higher wGSS was also
independently associated with a better VR at month 6. There was also a
trend toward an association with VR for the combination of algorithms
Geno2pheno and PSSM. The association between Geno2phenoClin and VR was
not found in multivariate models, including the nadir CD4 count,
probably because the nadir CD4 count was itself used for the prediction
of coreceptor use with this algorithm. It was thus difficult to
completely demonstrate the significance of prediction of VR by the
coreceptor use prediction, because of the important predictivity of the
nadir CD4 cell count and the overall good VR, due to MVC but also due to
background therapy.

It is of importance that this clinical validation of the genotypic
prediction of coreceptor use was assessed in a particular population of
viruses which had first been screened as R5 by the Trofile assay. We
thus showed that even in this biased population, genotypic tools can be
associated with VR. In a larger, and more diverse viral population
including patients screened as R5 but also found to be X4 or D/M by
Trofile, Harrigan et al. (presented at the 5th IAS Conference on HIV
Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention, CapeTown, South Africa, 2009)
showed that genotypic tools (Geno2pheno and PSSM) could predict the VR
to MVC-based regimens with a accuracy comparable to that of the Trofile
assay. Both studies are thus in favor of the use of genotypic tools for
coreceptor use determination in order to prescribe MVC in
antiretroviral-experienced patients. Similar conclusions were also
obtained from the Berlin Maraviroc Cohort (M. Obermeier, A. Carganico,
T. Berg, B. Hintsche, S. Köppe, A. Moll, C. Mayr, B. Bienek, F. Scholte,
and A. Baumgarten, presented at the 7th European HIV Drug Resistance
Workshop, Stockholm, Sweden, 2009). One important point for determining
the coreceptor usage with the Geno2pheno algorithm is the determination
of the false-positive rate (FPR) for the detection of X4 isolates. A
higher FPR enables the detection of more X4 viruses, but with less
specificity. Our data suggest that an FPR of 10% leads to a good balance
between sensitivity and specificity and shows the highest correlation
with VR. Interestingly, a recent study of the MOTIVATE Trial suggested
that a Geno2pheno score of 7.5% provided a good discrimination for the
prediction of an optimal VR to MVC (P. R. Harrigan, R. McGovern, W.
Dong, T. Mo, X. Zhong, D. Chapman, M. Lewis, A. Thielen, M. Jensen, H.
Valdez, J. Heera, et al., presented at the 12th European AIDS
Conference, Cologne, Germany, 2009).

Because of emerging evidence that the determinants of viral resistance
to MVC (i.e., CCR5 use in the presence of the inhibitor) can be found
predominantly within the V3 loop ( 2 ), we studied the prevalence of
specific substitutions previously associated with resistance to MVC in
the baseline isolates before therapy including MVC. Although some
patterns were found at a prevalence of 0.5% to 7.5%, no association
between the presence of these substitutions at baseline and a poorer VR
to MVC could be shown. Additional studies with higher statistical power
should be set up in order to further document this question.

Other studies will be needed to further study the prediction of
coreceptor use in HIV-1 non-B subtypes, since their prevalence was low
in our patients. An initial report showed a poor performance of
genotypic tools for non-B subtypes ( 6 ). However, two more recent
studies are in favor of this approach for CRF02_AG and subtype C ( 12 ,
14 ).

In conclusion, our study provides both biological and clinical
validation of genotypic tools for the prediction of HIV-1 coreceptor use
in antiretroviral-experienced patients. Our results and other already
cited concordant studies were the basis for the recommendation of
genotypic tests in this setting by the French Health Agency (
http://www.has-sante.fr ) and by the European guidelines (
www.europeanaidsclinicalsociety.org/guidelines.asp ). Genotypic tools
for coreceptor usage will now be used to prescribe CCR5 inhibitors in
antiretroviral-experienced patients. Further studies will be needed to
clinically validate the genotypic prediction of coreceptor use before
prescription of CCR5 inhibitors in antiretroviral-naïve patients or from
HIV-1 DNA in patients with undetectable viremia.




