# Low Rate of Transmitted Drug Resistance May Indicate Low Access to Antiretroviral Treatment in Maranhão State, Northeast Brazil

## Abstract

The Brazilian AIDS epidemic is characterized by significant geographic
contrasts: a reduction in incidence and mortality in the epicenter
(southeast) and an increase in the northeast. HIV-1-transmitted drug
resistance (TDR) and genetic diversity were investigated among 106
antiretroviral (ARV)-naive patients from Maranhão State, northeast. The
HIV-1 protease (PR) and reverse transcriptase (RT) regions were
sequenced; subtypes were assigned by REGA/phylogenetic analysis. TDR to
the nucleoside/nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
(NRTI/NNRTI) and protease inhibitor (PI) was identified by the
Calibrated Population Resistance tool (Stanford). The median age was 31
years (range 18--72), with 54.7% women, 78.3% heterosexual transmission,
and 17.9% men who have sex with men (MSM). Around 30% had \<350 CD4 ^+^
T cells/μl and 47.2% had plasma viral loads ≤10,000 copies/ml. The TDR
rate was 3.8% (4/106; CI 95%, 1.2--8.9%) (three males, two of them MSM).
Only single class mutations to NRTI (M184V; T215S) or NNRTI (K103S/N)
were detected. Subtype B represented 81.1% (86/106), F1 1.9% (2/106),
and C 2.8% (3/106); 14.2% were mosaics: 13 BF1 and 2 BC. Surveillance of
TDR and HIV-1 genetic diversity is important to improve control
strategies regionally.


Striking regional differences have been described in the dynamic of the
Brazilian AIDS epidemic, which has stabilized in the most populated and
industrialized southeast/south regions where cases are strongly
concentrated. In the past decade, a reduction of 18.6% in the AIDS
detection rate has taken place in the southeast, contrasting with a
62.6% increase in the northeast region, with high rates of
HIV-1-infected young individuals in the 15--24 year age range. ^1^ Since
the 1990s the Brazilian public health program has provided free
antiretroviral drugs (ARV) to more than 313,000 HIV-1/AIDS patients,
promoting a 14% reduction in AIDS-related mortality. ^1^ However, during
the past decade, a 33.3% growth in AIDS-related mortality was reported
in the northeast region. ^1^

One of the drawbacks of the widespread use of ARV is the selection of
mutations associated with drug resistance, which can be transmitted to
uninfected patients. Transmitted drug resistance (TDR) represents an
important public health issue that can impact initial treatment options
including highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) with nucleoside
and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI/NNRTI) and
protease inhibitors (PI). ^2^ Genotyping tests have been employed to
orient treatment options by identifying mutations that may confer
resistance to ARV drugs.

Since the beginning of the AIDS epidemic in Brazil, Maranhão State
(6,794,301 inhabitants) in northeast Brazil has identified 11,460 cases.
São Luís, the State capital, is a port city and Itaqui harbor exports
iron ore, pig iron, soy, petroleum derivatives, copper, and aluminum. In
the northeast, São Luís has the highest incidence of AIDS cases
(42.5/100,000 inhabitants) among municipalities with over 50,000
inhabitants. From 2009 to 2012, 10 referral centers for AIDS patients\'
care were available in Maranhão State, where most of the HIV-1-infected
patients were symptomatic and had AIDS-defining illness at diagnosis.
^3^

Low to moderate levels of TDR have been reported in patients from the
most densely populated southeast/south regions in Brazil. ^4--7^
However, there are very limited data from regions where the epidemic is
growing, including Maranhão State in northeast Brazil, our study area,
which has recently reported a 106.2% increase in AIDS cases rate. This
is the first detailed molecular epidemiological investigation of TDR and
HIV-1 genetic diversity among ARV-naive patients from Maranhão.
Surveillance of TDR and HIV-1 diversity is important, particularly in
areas of rising incidence such as northeast Brazil, and may contribute
to improved regional prevention strategies to control the epidemic.

A total of 138 consecutive cases of ARV-naive patients infected with
HIV-1 living in Maranhão State were enrolled (January--June 2012): 97
were recruited in São Luís at the regional referral center for CD4 ^+^
cell counts and viral loads determinations (Public Health Central
Laboratory/LACEN) and 41 patients were recruited in Teresina, Piauí
State at the Hospital de Doenças Tropicais Dr. Natan Portela. According
to official data approximately 10% of HIV-1/AIDS patients from Maranhão,
especially the ones living near the Maranhão-Piauí border, attend the
closest referral center, which is located in Teresina, Piauí. Age, sex
distribution, and time since diagnosis among patients recruited in São
Luís and Teresina were statistically similar. The 138 patients recruited
represented 21.1% of the 502 AIDS cases reported in Maranhão State
during the study period. ^3^

Among 138 ARV-naive patients recruited, 53 lived in São Luís city while
the remaining 85 patients lived in 44 different small interior villages
scattered throughout the state. Sociobehavioral data were obtained by
face-to-face interviews using standardized questionnaires. Clinical and
laboratory data (plasma viral load-bDNA, Siemens Medical Solutions,
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, and CD4 ^+^ T cell counts, FACSalibur,
Becton & Dickson, San Jose, CA) were retrieved in standardized
questionnaires from the medical files at Hospital Presidente Vargas, São
Luís, Maranhão and at Hospital de Doenças Tropicais Dr Natan Portela,
Teresina, Piauí. This study was approved by the regional Institutional
Review Boards (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa da Faculdade de Ciências
Médicas da Universidade Estadual do Piauí, protocol #022/2011, and
Comitê de Ética de Pesquisa do Hospital de Doenças Tropicais Dr Natan
Portela, protocol #16/2011). All participants were instructed about the
study and signed a written informed consent form.

HIV-1 RNA was extracted from plasma (QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit/QIAGEN,
Qiagen GmbH), reverse transcribed, and the complementary DNA (cDNA) was
used as the target for a nested polymerase chain reaction (nested PCR)
of the *pol* region as previously described. ^8^ The entire protease
(PR) and approximately 750 bp of the reverse transcriptase (RT) fragment
were amplified employing K1/K2 as external primers and DP10/F2 as
internal primers. After purification of amplicons (QIAquick PCR
Purification Kit/QIAGEN, Qiagen GmbH), genomic sequencing was performed
(BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing, Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA; ABI Prism 3130 Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA).

The HIV-1 subtypes were identified by REGA genotyping tool version 2.0
and by phylogenetic inference using reference sequences obtained from
Los Alamos HIV. Trees for phylogenetic analysis were generated by the
neighbor-joining method under Kimura\'s two-parameter correction model
using MEGA5 software. Bootstrap values (1,000 replicates) above 70% were
considered significant. SimPlot 3.5.1 was used to analyze intersubtype
recombination in sequences with discordant subtypes in the PR and RT
fragments. ^9^

The GenBank accession numbers used in the comparative phylogenetic and
SimPlot analyses are subtype B:
U21135 ,
FJ638434 ,
AY173956 ,
K03455 ,
EF379194 ,
EF379210 ,
FJ548795 ,
FJ548804 , and
U63632 ; subtype C:
AF110967 ,
U46016 ,
FJ548791 ,
FJ594149 ,
AF286228 ,
AF067155 , and
U52953 ; subtype F1:
DQ358801 ,
AF077336 , and
AF005494 ; and the simian immunodeficiency virus sequence from the
chimpanzee (SIVcpz):
X52154 , used as an outgroup.

TDR was analyzed using the Calibrated Population Resistance--CPR tool
(Stanford Surveillance Drug Resistance Mutation--SDRM). The ARV mutation
susceptibility profile was analyzed by the Stanford HIV Drug Resistance
Database. ^10^

Continuous variables were described as medians with minimum and maximum
range. Categorical variables were presented as frequency and percentage.
The Chi-square or Fisher\'s exact test was used to analyze the
differences among categorical variables, with a significance level of
5%. All descriptive analyses were performed using Epi Info version 7
(CDC, Atlanta).

In 106 out of 138 patients (76.8%) the PR and RT regions of HIV-1 were
amplified, sequenced, and described in this study. The median age was 31
years (range: 18--72 years), with females representing 54.7; 78.3%
reported heterosexual unprotected sex, 17.9% (19/106) were men who have
sex with men (MSM), and two participants (one female, one male) were
intravenous drug users (IDU). The median of CD4 ^+^ T cell count was 402
cells/μl (range: 8--1,193 cells/μl) and 34/106 (32.1%) had cell counts
below 350 cells/μl. Plasma viral loads ranged from below 10,000
copies/ml (47.2%, 50/106) to over 100,000 copies/ml (6.6%, 7/106).

The TDR rate was 3.8% (4/106; CI 95%, 1.2--8.9%); three out of four were
males and two out of three men were MSM ( Table 1 ). The median of CD4
^+^ T cell counts in TDR cases was 218.5 cells/μl (range 51--569
cells/μl) and the median of plasma viral load was 22,169 copies/ml
(1,770--139,308 copies/ml range). Only singleton mutations associated
with NRTI (M184V and T215S) or with NNRTI (K103S and K103N) were
detected. No major mutation to PI was identified; however, two isolates
presented PI accessory mutations (L10I and A71V).


"Pure" non-subtype B isolates were rare: two subtype F1 (1.9%) and three
subtype C (2.8%). "Pure" subtype B predominated (81.1%, 86/106) and most
PR/RT sequences (85.8%, 91/106) clustered with a single HIV-1 subtype.
However, 14.2% of the isolates were mosaic forms with discordant
subtypes in the PR and RT regions ( Fig. 1 ). Among 13 B/F1 recombinant
mosaics, several different recombination patterns were observed: B ^PR^
/BF1B ^RT^ ( *n* =6), B ^PR^ /BF1 ^RT^ ( *n* =3), F1 ^PR^ /BF1B ^RT^ (
*n* =1), F1 ^PR^ /BF1 ^RT^ ( *n* =2), and F1B ^PR^ /B ^RT^ ( *n* =1).
One B ^PR^ /C ^RT^ and one C ^PR^ /CB ^RT^ recombinant were also
detected.


Phylogenetic analyses of pure and recombinant sequences indicated seven
clusters with high support values (\>70%) comprising 15 isolates (data
not shown). Five of these clusters aligned within the HIV-1 subtype B
clade and one comprised two isolates obtained from a heterosexual couple
with a known epidemiological link (
KF782707 ,
KF782708 ). Two other clusters comprised the B/F1 mosaic viruses: one
with isolates from a heterosexual couple (
KF782705 ,
KF782732 ) and the other with sequences from one MSM and two females,
suggesting a possible link between these two groups (
KF782706 ,
KF782719 , and
KF782681 ).

The first detailed study on the molecular pattern of HIV-1 circulating
among ARV-naive patients living in Maranhão State, northeast Brazil
showed a low rate of TDR (3.8%) detected mostly in male patients, two
MSM and one heterosexual. Despite the low TDR rate, resistance should be
monitored in Maranhão State where a significant increase in AIDS cases
and associated mortality has been reported in the past decade. Higher
TDR rates regionally may represent additional public health challenges.
The Brazilian AIDS epidemic is highly heterogeneous within its five
geographic regions reflecting striking socioeconomic contrasts.

Although Brazil is among the countries with emerging economies, Maranhão
ranks as one of the most resource-limited states in the country,
presenting the second lowest human development index (HDI, a statistical
tool developed by the United Nations to measure and rank levels of
social and economic development based on life expectancy at birth, mean
years of schooling, expected years of schooling, and gross national
income per capita). Among the recent trends of the Brazilian AIDS
epidemic is the increasing incidence among the poor and underprivileged.
^1^ It is possible that the low access to health and education
facilities faced by patients living in Maranhão may contribute to the
regional spread of the virus. In this sense, the low TDR rate would not
be a good public health indicator and might be associated with late
diagnosis and probably low access to ARV treatment. ^11^

As expected for TDR, only singleton mutations to either NRTI or to NNRTI
were detected. The M184V NRTI resistance mutation detected is
responsible for lamivudine (3TC) resistance, which also increases
susceptibility to zidovudine (ZDV) and stavudine (d4T). The revertant
T215S mutation is considered a "track" of the T215Y/F mutation
transmitted to one ZDV-naive patient that reverted to a phenotype closer
to the wild type. Previous Brazilian studies have described T215
revertant mutations in ARV-naive patients. ^8\ ,\ 12\ ,\ 13^ The K103N
NNRTI mutation causes high-level resistance to nevirapine (NVP) and
efavirenz (EFV), which is an important component of the HAART regimen in
Brazil. The K103S mutation causes intermediate/high-level resistance to
NVP and low/intermediate-level resistance to EFV. Interestingly, in this
study five patients had the common polymorphic accessory mutation E138A,
which although not included in the CPR database, can be weakly selected
by rilpivirine (RPV), a drug still not available in Brazil, decreasing
its susceptibility by ∼2-fold.

In Maranhão State the HIV-1 epidemic is highly driven by subtype B.
Subtype F1 was rare, different from previous reports from northeast
Brazil where it is the second most prevalent subtype. Moreover, this
study from Maranhão shows a low prevalence of subtype C, which is the
most prevalent variant in south Brazil. Recent studies from central west
Brazil indicate subtype C dissemination northward, mainly among young
women. ^14^

The low prevalence of "pure" F1 and C subtypes in this setting contrasts
with the 14% prevalence of mosaic viruses: 13 BF1 and 2 BC recombinants.
The rate of BF1 recombinants in southeast and in northeast Brazil is
around 4%. ^15^ Higher rates have been reported in central west Goiás
State (7.2%), Mato Grosso State (12%), Mato Grosso do Sul State (8.2%),
and Tocantins State (9.6%) in north Brazil. ^8\ ,\ 12\ ,\ 13\ ,\ 15^ The
cocirculation of different subtypes favors coinfection or
superinfection, which is required for intersubtype recombination. In the
context of rare "pure" subtype F1 and C viruses, the import of mosaic
BF1 and BC viruses from other regions such as central Brazil or
elsewhere is highly probable. Also, given the high diversity of BF1
mosaic patterns detected it is also possible that second- or
third-generation BF1 recombinants are being produced by the
recombination of imported BF1 viruses with subtype B, which is highly
prevalent regionally. PR and RT fragments are considered hotspots for
recombination and, more recently, increased genotyping to monitor ARV
therapy has shown a growing rate of unrelated BF1 mosaic viruses in
Brazil, which has been considered a geographic recombination hotspot.
The relationship among these BF1 mosaic viruses from the northeast and
other BF1 circulating recombinant forms (CRFs) already described in
Brazil or elsewhere deserves further study.

Seaports represent important settings for the spread of HIV-1/AIDS and
other sexually transmitted diseases as thousands of male sailors from
around the world wait for ships to be unloaded and arriving truck
drivers are usually served by a thriving sex industry. Therefore the
regional AIDS epidemic is probably influenced by the Itaqui Port in São
Luís, one of the most important seaports and the second largest in cargo
volume in the country. In southeastern Brazil, one of the highest rates
of AIDS cases is reported in Santos, the largest port in Latin America
and a major transportation hub to all Brazilian regions and to the rest
of South America. Also, the subtype C epidemic in Brazil was originally
thought to have been initiated in the southern area in the city of Rio
Grande, which has one of the largest seaports in the country, which
serves as a southern transportation hub to neighboring countries in
South America, and which receives ships from Africa and Asia.

In conclusion, the low level of TDR in individuals infected with HIV-1
living in Maranhão in the northeast, where late diagnosis has been
reported, suggests that this rate may be higher among recently infected
individuals. The genetic diversity observed indicates a probable
insertion of recombinant viruses generated and circulating in other
regions as well as local dissemination clusters. In this
resource-limited setting with a rising incidence of HIV-1/AIDS and
related mortality, HIV-1 molecular data provided in this study may
contribute to better management, prevention, and control strategies.

Go to:


## Sequence Data

The GenBank accession numbers of sequences analyzed in this study are
KF782680-KF782785 .

