# Patients Infected with HIV Type 1 Subtype CRF01_AE and Failing First-Line Nevirapine- and Efavirenz-Based Regimens Demonstrate Considerable Cross-Resistance to Etravirine

Weerawat Manosuthi ,

^1,,^ ^2^ David M. Butler , ^3^ Wasun Chantratita , ^2^ Chonlaphat
Sukasem , ^2^ Douglas D. Richman , ^3,,^ ^4^ and Davey M. Smith ^3,,^
^4^

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer


##

E ditor : The nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)
class of drugs is a widely used component of highly active
antiretroviral therapy, but a low barrier to resistance is a major
limitation of this drug class. ^1^ Etravirine, a new NNRTI, has potent
antiviral efficacy against both wild-type and NNRTI-resistant subtype B
HIV-1 strains. ^2^ Rather than one or two mutations conferring
resistance to a specific drug, such as nevirapine or efavirenz,
resistance to etravirine develops through the accumulation of multiple
NNRTI resistance-associated mutations (RAMs), i.e., higher genetic
barrier to resistance. ^3\ ,\ 4^ Specifically, 17 RAMs have been
associated with virologic responses to etravirine use and a relative
weighted score has been proposed; 74%, 52%, and 38% patients receiving
etravirine achieved viral suppression (\<50 copies/ml) in the presence
of 0--2, 2.5--3.5, and \>3.5 of scores, respectively. ^5^

Unlike the subtype B epidemic found in western countries where
etravirine has been evaluated, the HIV epidemic in the Southeast Asian
countries is mainly caused by subtype CRF_01 AE, and etravirine
resistance has not been evaluated in relation to this or other non-B
subtypes. ^6\ --\ 8^ This is important, as the NNRTIs nevirapine and
efavirenz are extensively used in this region where viral load
monitoring is limited, thereby allowing for prolonged periods of
undetected virologic failure during exposure to these drugs, which would
increase the accumulation of NNRTI-RAMs. ^9^ In addition, the genetic
background of the infecting HIV-1 subtype may also influence the types
and cross-resistance of the NNRTI-RAMs that emerge. ^10\ ,\ 11^ To
investigate these issues, we examined the associated factors and
frequency of etravirine cross-resistance in a clinical practice in which
viral loads are available and among patients infected with CRF_01 AE
failing first-line efavirenz- and nevirapine-based regimens in Thailand.

All patients followed at Bamrasnaradura Infectious Diseases Institute,
Ministry of Public Health, Thailand, between January 2005 and June 2008
were evaluated for antiretroviral therapy failure based on guidelines
for antiretroviral therapy of the Thai AIDS Society, which define
failure as viral load \>1000 copies/ml after 6 months of receiving
treatment or a rebound of viral load to \>1000 copies/ml in any duration
after undetectable viral load. ^12^ For cohort patients identified with
failing first-line antiretroviral therapy regimens, the HIV-1 RNA *pol*
gene was genotyped (TRUGENE HIV-1). All sequences were aligned and
analyzed using Geneious Pro 4.5.4. Genotypic NNRTI susceptibility was
determined using the Stanford Resistance Database (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/ accessed February 2009), which included the
following list of 17 etravirine-RAMs: V90I, A98G, L100I, K101E/H/P,
V106I, E138A, V179D/F/T, Y181C/I/V, G190A/S, and M230L. ^9^ A weighted
etravirine-RAM score of 0--2, 2.5--3.5, and \>3.5 was computed for each
sequence, ^5^ and RAM codons were compared across subtype B and CRF01_AE
consensus sequences ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov accessed February 2009).
Frequencies (%) and median (interquartile range, IQR) were used to
describe demographic characteristics, and odds ratios were presented.
Fisher\'s exact test was used to compare frequencies of etravirine-RAMs
between weighted score 0--2 versus \>2, 0--3.5 versus \>3.5, and among
those patients receiving nevirapine versus efavirenz. Pearson\'s
correlation was used to analyze the correlation of weighted scores and
plasma HIV-1 RNA at the time of virologic failure. All analyses were
performed using SPSS software version 11.5 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). A
two-tailed *p* value less than 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. All sequences are available at
http://id.ucsd.edu/Faculty/DaveySmithMD/DATA/tabid/338/Default.aspx .

A total of 147 *pol* sequences were obtained from patients with first
virologic failure who received nevirapine- and efavirenz-based regimens.
Thirteen non-CRF01_AE sequences were excluded. A total of 134 sequences
were included into the final analysis. In all, 110 (82%) patients were
receiving nevirapine-based regimens and 24 (18%) were receiving
efavirenz. At time of failure, median (IQR) viral load was 4.1
(3.5--4.8) log ~10~ copies/ml, median (IQR) CD4 cell count was 142
(72--206) cells/μl, and median treatment duration was 2.1 years. The
most recent viral load measurement before recognition of virologic
failure was obtained after a median of 6.1 months. The median nadir CD4
cell count was 33 (5--86) cells/μl. Backbone nucleoside reverse
transcriptase (NRTI) regimens included 76% stavudine + lamivudine, 15%
zidovudine + lamivudine, 6% tenofovir + lamivudine, 2%
zidovudine + didanosine, and 2% stavudine + didanosine.

All etravirine-RAMs except K101P, E138A, and V179F were found, and the
frequency of each etravirine-RAM is shown in Fig. 1 . By the weighted
scoring, 59 (44%), 58 (43%), and 17 (13%) of all sequences had scores of
0--2, 2.5--3.5, and \>3.5, respectively. An etravirine-weighted score
\>2.0 was associated with nevirapine-based regimens ( *p* \< 0.001,
OR = 6.7), viral load ≥4.5 log ~10~ copies/ml ( *p* = 0.025, OR = 2.5),
and Y181C mutations ( *p* \< 0.001, OR = 333.3). An etravirine-weighted
score \>3.5 was associated with mutations: Y181C ( *p* \< 0.001,
OR = 1.4), V106I ( *p* \< 0.001, OR = 26.3), and G190A ( *p* = 0.020,
OR = 3.4). In addition, a weighted score of \>2.0 was also associated
with failing nevirapine ( *p* = 0.001, OR = 5.3). By correlation
analysis, higher weighted scores trended toward an association ( *p*
= 0.063, *r* = 0.163) with higher viral loads at time of virologic
failure. The patients who received a nevirapine-based regimen at time of
failure had a higher proportion of Y181C (56% vs. 8%, *p* \< 0.001 and
OR = 14.2). Conversely, those who received an efavirenz-based regimen
had a higher proportion of A98G (21% vs. 6%, *p* = 0.040 and OR = 3.9).
All thymidine analogue mutations were not found to be associated with
etravirine-RAMs ( *p* \> 0.05). Comparing the wild-type consensus
sequences of subtype B to that of CRF01_AE, the percent similarity of
nucleotide codons influencing etravirine-RAMs was 100% concordant;
however, the percent similarity for other subtypes was 98%, 94%, 90%,
90%, 88%, and 88% for subtypes D, H, C, G, A, and F, respectively. In
our sample, the maximum likelihood estimate of the mean pairwise genetic
similarity between CRF01_AE *pol* sequences, based on the fit of the
codon model to a neighbor joining tree, was 94.2%.

FIG. 1.

Frequency of etravirine-RAMs among 134 CRF01_AE sequences.

This study shows that the prevalence of high-level etravirine resistance
in clinical practice is substantial after virologic failure of
first-line NNRTI-based regimens, particularly nevirapine, among patients
infected with the CRF01_AE subtype in a tertiary care HIV referral
center in Thailand. Of note, mutation Y181C was the most frequent
etravirine-RAM and was detected in almost half of all sequences, which
is probably because this RAM is frequently isolated from patients
treated with nevirapine ^13^ and approximately 80% of our study patients
were experiencing nevirapine-based regimen failure. The K103N mutation,
commonly isolated from patients experiencing efavirenz-based regimen
failure, ^14^ is not a recognized etravirine RAM. ^5^ Moreover, a study
from Italy among individuals most likely infected with subtype B virus
demonstrated that a delayed diagnosis of virologic failure contributes
to a 5% increase in risk of etravirine-RAMs for each month after the
first detectable viral load. ^15^ In our clinical setting, we were
fortunate to have access to virologic monitoring, approximately every 6
months; some regions in Southeast Asia are not as fortunate and use WHO
immunologic criteria to define ART failure, ^16^ which most likely
exacerbates the observed situation of increased development of
etravirine RAMs during first-line NNRTI-based ART.

Although evaluating etravirine response by weighted score is not widely
accepted, this study can provide some beneficial non-subtype B data;
therefore we also investigated how the infecting subtype could influence
the development of etravirine RAMs. We found that the consensus
nucleotide codons influencing etravirine-RAMs were not different between
subtype CRF01_AE and subtype B, which may explain the similarity between
our results and the Italian study. ^15^ In our survey of other subtypes,
we also found considerable similarity in viral genetic backgrounds for
the development of etravirine RAMs; however, subtypes A and F might be
the most likely to demonstrate varying patterns of NNRTI drug resistance
and should be further evaluated. ^11^

Given these results, etravirine should most likely be avoided in salvage
regimens in the setting of first-line nevirapine failure and where drug
resistance testing is not performed. Because etravirine-RAM codons are
relatively conserved across subtypes, the prevalence of resistance is
likely to be high in other resource-limited settings with limited
virologic monitoring and high use of nevirapine-based regimens.
Similarly in these settings, transmitted drug resistance is most likely
to be highly prevalent or on its way to be highly prevalent, ^17\ ,\ 18^
and therefore the usefulness of etravirine as even a first-line ART drug
is suspect.



## Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank Samruay Nilkamhang for her coordination
of the study.



## Author Disclosure Statement

No competing financial interests exist.

