
# Clade homogeneity and *Pol* gene polymorphisms in chronically HIV-1 infected antiretroviral treatment naive patients after the roll out of ART in Ethiopia

## Abstract

### Background

Despite the increasing use of antiretroviral treatment (ART) recent data
on frequency and pattern of drug resistance mutations in Ethiopia is not
available. Furthermore with increasing mobility of people HIV-1 subtypes
other than the predominant subtype C may likely be introduced from the
neighbouring countries. This study was aimed to determine the molecular
characterization and pre-antiretroviral treatment resistance mutations
among HIV-1 chronically infected ART naïve patients after the roll out
of ART in Ethiopia.

### Methods

Viral RNA was determined in 160 baseline plasma samples. The entire PR
and the first 335 codons (76%) of the RT regions of the *pol* gene of
the HIV-1 genome (N = 160) were amplified and sequenced using an
in-house assay. Genotypic drug resistance was defined as the presence of
one or more resistance-related mutations as specified by the consensus
mutation of Stanford University HIVDB and the International Antiviral
Society (IAS) mutation lists.

### Results

A predominance of HIV-1 subtype C (98.7%) was observed. The level of
drug resistance is found to be 5.6% and 13.1% according to the Stanford
University HIVDB drug resistance interpretation algorithms and the
International Antiviral Society mutation lists, respectively. Mutations
conferring simultaneous resistance to NRTIs and NNRTIs were not detected
and no major PR mutation was found. However, a high rate of polymorphic
changes both in PR and RT regions were observed. Moreover, twenty four
(15%) monophyletic transmission clusters with bootstrap value of 99%
were found.

### Conclusions

Strong evidence for consistent HIV-1C clade homogeneity and low influx
of other variant into the country was found. The level of drug
resistance observed in chronically infected treatment naïve patients
which exceeds the WHO estimates suggests the need for incorporation of
HIV-1 drug resistance testing prior to ART initiation. The occurrence of
monophyletic transmission clusters affecting (24/160) individuals
indicates their potential risk related practice. Thus, an intensified
public health intervention program and monitoring of HIV drug resistance
testing appears indispensible.



## Methods

### Patients

HIV-1 chronically infected treatment naïve patients (N = 160) with
advanced diseases (WHO clinical stages III and IV) \[ 12 \] above
18 years of age and seeking care and treatment at Gondar University
Hospital for the first time, Northwest Ethiopia in 2008/2009 were
recruited consecutively. Patients were excluded for the following
reasons: pregnant or had taken single dose nevirapine (NVP) for
prevention of mother to child transmission (PMTCT) or patients with
known chronic illness or any previous ART use.

### Blood collection

Five ml venous blood was collected in vacutainer tubes containing
ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Baseline CD4 ^+^ T cell count
was measured using the FACSCount flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, San
Jose, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol. Plasma was
separated by centrifugation and stored at −40°C.

### RNA extraction and plasma viral load determination

RNA extraction was done with the Abbott m2000sp automated sample
preparation system using mSample preparation system RNA kit. Plasma
viral load was determined with Abbott m2000rt Quantitative RealTime
HIV-1 assay (Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, USA) with a lower
detection limit of 40 copies/ml.

### Reverse transcription and PCR amplification for *pol* gene sequencing

The entire PR and the first 335 codons (76%) of the RT regions of the
pol gene of the HIV-1 genome of 160 patients were amplified with an
in-house protocol as described before \[ 13 \]. Briefly, RNA elute was
reverse transcribed using AMV reverse transcriptase (Promega
Corporation, WI, USA) by an outer primer HIVrt (Table 1 ). Viral cDNA
was amplified by nested PCR using Phusion Hot Start High-Fidelity DNA
polymerase (Finnzymes, Espoo, Finland) by outer primers HIVpcrFor1 and
HIVpcrRev1 (yielding a 1757 bp amplicon) and subsequently by the inner
primers HIVpcrFor2 and HIVpcrRev2 (yielding a 1389 bp amplicon, Table 1
). Initial denaturation was done at 98°C for 2 min followed by 40 cycles
consisting of 10 sec of denaturation at 98°C and 25 sec of annealing at
64°C for the first round and at 53°C for the second round with a 40 sec
extension at 72°C for both and final extension for 5 min at 72°C.

### Sequencing

Purified PCR products were subjected to direct sequencing of both sense
and antisense strands using Big Dye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready
Reaction kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). For each
sample, six separate sequencing reactions were done using the two inner
PCR primers (HIVpcrFor2 and HIVpcrRev2) and four additional internal
primers: HIVseq1, HIVseq2, HIVseq3 and HIVseq4 (Table 1 ) which allowed
a double coverage of the *pol* region. All primer positions are matched
to HIV-1HXB2 (GenBank accession number K03455). Both forward and reverse
overlapping sequences were manually edited with the Geneious software
version 5.4 \[ 14 \].

### Phylogenetic analysis

*Pol* gene sequences were aligned with reference subtypes (A-D, F-H, J,
K, circulating recombinant forms (CRFs) and SIV) obtained from HIV
Sequence Database at Los Alamos ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov ) accessed on
September 24, 2013. Phylogenetic inferences were performed by the
neighbour-joining method with 1,000 bootstrap replicates under Kimura's
two-parameter correction using MEGA 5. The evolutionary distances were
computed using the Maximum Composite Likelihood method and are in the
units of the number of base substitutions per site \[ 15 \].

### Drug resistance analysis

The existing drug resistance interpretation algorithms use lists of
amino acid mutations that are associated with drug resistance, derived
largely from research of HIV-1B infected individuals \[ 16 -- 20 \].
With this limitation, in this study genotypic drug resistance was
defined as the presence of one or more resistance-related mutations, as
specified by the consensus mutation of Stanford University HIVDB (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu ) accessed on September 24, 2013 and the
latest definition of the International Antiviral Society (IAS) mutation
lists \[ 16 \].

### Statistical analysis

Age, sex, WHO clinical stage, CD4 ^+^ T cell count and HIV RNA level
were included in the statistical analysis using SPSS statistical
software (Version 17, USA). Student *t* test was used and a p-value
of \< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Ethical issue

Ethical clearance and written informed consent from the University of
Gondar Ethical Review Committee (RPO/55/291/00) and each study subjects
was obtained, respectively.


## Results

### Patient's characteristics

One hundred and sixty samples (73 males and 87 females) were amplified
and sequenced for HIV-1 subtyping and genotypic drug resistance
analysis. The mean ± SD age of the subjects was 32.3 ± 8.5 years (range
18--66 years). The socio-demographic, clinical, immunological and
virological characteristics of the patients are summarized in Table 2 .
The mean log ~10~ HIV RNA level of the patients was significantly lower
(4.46log ~10~ versus 5.51log ~10~ ) in patients with higher (\>200
cells/mm ^3^ ) compared with lower (\<200 cells/mm ^3^ ) CD4 ^+^ T cell
strata (P \< 0.001).

### HIV-1 subtypes

All sequences clustered with HIV-1C in HIV pol genome with a bootstrap
value of 83% (Figure 1 ). However, 2 patients had discordant HIV-1
subtypes according to HIVDB: In one sample (ETH-G-5768) PR and RT was
identified as HIV-1 subtype D and C, respectively and in another
(ETH-G-5685) PR and RT was sub-typed as subtype K and C, respectively.
Twenty four (15%) closely related monophyletic transmission clusters
with bootstrap value of 99% were observed (Figure 1 ). Of which samples
ETH-G-5518, ETH-G-5512 and ETH-G-5503 are confirmed samples come from
heterosexual couples in which one Muslim man had married with two women;
ETH-G-5524 and ETH-G-5525 derived from another confirmed heterosexual
couples. Definite phylogenetic relation with a particular subtype C
isolates from other countries where subtype C circulates (S. Africa,
India and Brazil) was also observed (Figure 1 ).

### Genotypic drug resistance

According to the IAS and the HIVDB interpretation algorithms 13.1%
(21/160) and 5.6% (9/160), respectively were found to have one or more
mutation conferring resistance to RTIs (Table 3 ). There was no major
drug resistance mutation in PR region. In both algorithms, simultaneous
resistance to NRTIs and NNRTIs (Table 3 ) was not detected. In addition,
minor mutations that might contribute to PIs resistance and a number of
polymorphic changes have been observed in both PR (Table 4 , Figure 2 A)
and RT regions (Table 4 , Figure 2 B).

Five patients had NNRTI resistance (K101E in one, Y188H in one, G190A in
two and M230I in one patient) according to the Stanford University drug
resistance database and IAS mutation lists (Table 3 ). In addition,
according to IAS (Table 3 ) etravirine resistance associated mutations
V90I and E138A/G were observed in 3 (1.9%) and 10 (6.5%) of the
patients, respectively which increase the overall magnitude of NNRTI
resistance to 10.6% (17/160). One patient had both K101E (in both IAS
and/or Stanford algorithms) and E138A mutations (in IAS algorithm).

As indicated in Table 4 , a polymorphic mutation K101R was observed in
another patient. The polymorphic mutation K103R which occurs in 1-2% of
untreated persons and reduces NVP, DLV and EFV susceptibility was also
observed in one patient. In addition, highly unusual mutations at known
subtype B drug resistance position conferring resistance to NNRTI were
observed (Table 4 ). In 23.7% (38/160) of the patients a polymorphic
change from A to S at codon 98 was observed, a substitution that was
recently introduced into the ANRS algorithm as conferring resistance to
nevirapine in subtype C only ( http://www.hivfrenchresistance.org ).

In both algorithms, four patients (2.6%) had NRTI resistance-associated
mutations. K65R was observed in one patient. Mutations at position 210
from L to W and at 219 from K to E were observed in two and one patient,
respectively. A revertant mutation T215A was also observed in 3 (1.9%)
of the patients. Moreover atypical mutations at known subtype B drug
resistance positions (Table 4 ) conferring resistance to NRTI were
observed at positions M41 (2.3%), D67 (2.3%), Q151 (1.5%), M184 (3.1%)
and T215 (2%).

### Drug resistance versus immunological and virological data

Table 3 depicts individual mutation profiles of chronically infected
treatment naïve patients and their resistance to distinct antiretroviral
drugs. Most resistant viruses were detected in females. There was no
significant difference in the plasma HIV RNA level (P value = 0.152) and
CD4 ^+^ T cell counts (P value = 0.170) of patients with and without
drug resistance mutations (Table 5 ). However, among the patients with
drug resistance mutation, the majority were observed in patients with
the age of greater than 25 years (Tables 3 and 5 ).


## Discussion

This study provides the first description of HIV-1 drug resistance in
chronically infected ART naive patients after the scale up of ART in
Ethiopia and shows an increase in magnitude of TDR with expanded access
of ART in the country and is in line with reports from eastern and
southern African countries \[ 4 , 6 \]. The results also highlight the
need to scale up PIs in the country. The two fold variation in the
magnitude of drug resistance between IAS drug resistance mutations lists
(13.1%) and HIVDB DR Interpretation algorithm (5.6%) indicates the
difficulty of interpreting drug resistance mutation in subtype C
isolates \[ 16 -- 20 \]. The level of drug resistance in the current
study is significantly higher than the previous report from the same
area (3.3%) sampled in 2002 \[ 7 \] but similar with findings from other
eastern and southern Africa countries after the roll out of ART \[ 4 --
6 \] which support the notion that scaling up of ART in Africa will
drive the emergence of TDR. The findings also imply that many HIV
infected individuals receiving ART are continuing to exercise risk
related behaviour which is in line with behavioural study in Ethiopia \[
21 \] and an eventual increase of TDR cases is anticipated in the
country. Thus, an intensified public health intervention program
directed at such patients to prevent TDR viruses is warranted.

In contrast to a previous report among pregnant women from central
Ethiopia \[ 8 \] and other African countries in which TDR was
interpreted based on the WHO HIV drug resistance threshold survey, the
frequency of resistant associated mutation in the current study is
higher than the WHO HIV drug resistance threshold survey report \[ 22 \]
which is similar with a recent study from Tanzania \[ 23 \].
Nevertheless, it is difficult to directly compare the data from these
studies since there were differences in the inclusion criteria, the
representativeness of the samples and the resistance algorithms used for
interpretation. The current study was a hospital based study among
chronically infected patients seeking treatment but the studies for WHO
TDR surveillance were based on recently seroconverted individuals below
25 years of age with CD4 ^+^ T cell counts of \>500 cells/ml and
primigravida women.

Although the mutations associated with resistance to NNRTIs in subtype C
isolates in this study were similar with previous studies from other
African countries \[ 4 , 6 \] different patterns and frequencies of
specific mutations were observed with 10.3% prevalence of drug
resistance to this drug classes according to the IAS resistance mutation
list. The detection of mutations conferring resistance to NVP (G190A and
Y188H) in 4 patients is high compared with previous report from Ethiopia
\[ 7 , 8 \] and other African countries \[ 4 , 6 \] before the scale up
ART which may be associated with the prophylactic use of single dose NVP
for the PMTCT in the country \[ 22 \] and the low genetic threshold for
resistance to NNRTI. It is also worse enough to detect etravirine
associated mutations (V90I, K101E and E138A) in 8.4% of the patients in
areas where etravirine is yet not available. This is much higher than
the previous reports \[ 7 , 8 \] indicating the higher evolutionary rate
of HIV-1C in Ethiopia and that HIV-1 variants containing these mutations
are circulating in the absence of etravirine in the country. Thus, the
introduction of etravirine in African countries where subtype C is
predominantly circulating needs attention.

The 2.6% frequency of resistance mutation to NRTIs is low compared with
studies from other African countries \[ 4 , 6 \]. Low rate of K65R
mutation which causes intermediate resistance to most of the NRTIs and
low level resistance to d4T \[ 24 , 25 \] was observed in one patient
and could be due to the recent availability of tenofovir in Ethiopia.
Although this mutation is relatively uncommon, there has been an
increase in its prevalence in some countries as a result of the
widespread clinical use of tenofovir \[ 26 -- 29 \]. Moreover, despite
the wide use of thymidine analogs (zidovidine or stavudine) in Ethiopia,
thymidine analog mutations were observed in low frequency unlike
previous similar studies \[ 4 \].

The absence of major drug resistance mutation in PR region is consistent
with previous studies \[ 4 -- 7 \] and might be related to the late
introduction and limited access of this drug class in the region.
However, the rate of minor mutations (Table 4 ) is consistent with the
previous studies among subtype C isolates \[ 17 , 30 -- 32 \]. Although
the clinical significance of these natural polymorphisms in non-B
subtypes is controversial \[ 33 \], it is suggested that they may
influence the risk of treatment failure, as it does for clade B viruses
\[ 34 \] and may facilitate the selection of different pathways and/or a
more rapid emergence of drug resistance and treatment failure \[ 32 , 35
\].

The present data clearly shows the predominance (98.7%) of HIV-1 subtype
C in Ethiopia similar with previous reports \[ 7 -- 10 \] and provides a
strong evidence for consistent HIV-1C clade homogeneity in the country
for the past 4 decades. The reason for the predominance of subtype C in
Ethiopia cannot be given with absolute certainty. However, it can be
speculated that this subtype when introduced first into the country, has
rapidly saturated the commercial sex workers network \[ 9 , 10 , 35 \].
Although, the lack of other subtypes suggest a low influx of subtypes
from neighbouring countries \[ 9 , 10 \] the rare findings of the
inter-subtype recombinant CD and CK may have epidemiological
contribution to HIV epidemic in Ethiopia. Moreover, the 15% monophyletic
transmission clusters observed in current isolates imply that many HIV
infected individuals are exercising risk related behaviour and
highlights the importance of understanding transmission dynamics of
HIV-1 subtype C in the population.


## Conclusion

In conclusion, there is strong evidence for consistent HIV-1C clade
homogeneity and low influx of other HIV-1 subtypes to Ethiopia for the
past 4 decades. The observed level of drug resistance which exceeds the
WHO's estimates suggests the need for routine HIV-1 genotypic drug
resistance testing for treatment naïve patients and supports the
hypothesis that scaling-up of ART in resource limited settings drive the
development of drug resistance. The absence of major drug resistance
mutations in PR gene suggest for scaling-up of PIs in Ethiopia. The
occurrence of monophyletic transmission clusters in 15% of individuals
indicate their potential of risk related practice and thus, an
intensified public health intervention program targeting such
individuals is warranted.

### Sequence data

Nucleotide sequences are deposited in National Centre for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI), USA GenBank (Accession Number: KF026059-KF026220).

