Viral Genetic Diversity and Polymorphisms in a Cohort of HIV-1-Infected
Patients Eligible for Initiation of Antiretroviral Therapy in Abuja,
Nigeria - PMC

Back to Top

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here\'s how you know

Log in

Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation

**Preview improvements coming to the PMC website in October 2024. Learn
More or Try it out now .**

Search PMC Full-Text Archive

Search in PMC

-   Advanced Search
-   User Guide

-

::: {role="main"}
-   Journal List
-   HHS Author Manuscripts
-   PMC4696873

As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in
an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the
contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.\
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer \| PMC Copyright Notice

AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 Dec
30.

*Published in final edited form as:*

AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2015 May; 31(5): 564--575.

Published online 2015 Feb 5. doi: 10.1089/AID.2014.0168

PMCID: PMC4696873

NIHMSID: NIHMS746536

PMID: 25582324


# Viral Genetic Diversity and Polymorphisms in a Cohort of HIV-1-Infected Patients Eligible for Initiation of Antiretroviral Therapy in Abuja, Nigeria

Karidia Diallo , ^1,^ ^\*^ Du-Ping Zheng , ^1,^ ^\*^ Erin K. Rottinghaus
, ^1^ Orji Bassey , ^2^ and Chunfu Yang ^1^

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer

The publisher\'s final edited version of this article is available at
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses

Go to:


## Abstract

Studying the genetic diversity and natural polymorphisms of HIV-1 would
benefit our understanding of HIV drug resistance (HIVDR) development and
predict treatment outcomes. In this study, we have characterized the
HIV-1 genetic diversity and natural polymorphisms at the 5′ region of
the *pol* gene encompassing the protease (PR) and reverse transcriptase
(RT) from 271 plasma specimens collected in 2008 from HIV-1-infected
patients who were eligible for initiating antiretroviral therapy in
Abuja (Nigeria). The analysis indicated that the predominant subtype was
subtype G (31.0%), followed by CRF02-AG (19.2 %), CRF43-02G (18.5%), and
A/CRF36-cpx (11.4%); the remaining (19.9%) were other subtypes and
circulating (CRF) and unique (URF) recombinant forms. Recombinant
viruses (68.6%) were the major viral strains in the region. Eighty-four
subtype G sequences were further mainly classified into two major and
two minor clusters; sequences in the two major clusters were closely
related to the HIV-1 strains in two of the three major subtype G
clusters detected worldwide. Those in the two minor clusters appear to
be new subtype G strains circulating only in Abuja. The pretreatment DR
prevalence was \< 3%; however, numerous natural polymorphisms were
present. Eleven polymorphic mutations (G16E, K20I, L23P, E35D, M36I,
N37D/S/T, R57K, L63P, and V82I) were detected in the PR that were
subtype or CRF specific while only three mutations (D123N, I135T, and
I135V) were identified in the RT. Overall, this study indicates an
evolving HIV-1 epidemic in Abuja with recombinant viruses becoming the
dominant strains and the emergence of new subtype G strains;
pretreatment HIVDR was low and the occurrence of natural polymorphism in
the PR region was subtype or CRF dependent.

Go to:


## Introduction

ONE OF THE MAJOR CHALLENGES in controlling the HIV/AIDS pandemic is the
genetic variability of HIV and its consequences for the development of
antiretroviral (ARV) drugs and vaccine. HIV vaccine development has been
hindered by its extensive genetic heterogeneity. ^1\ ,\ 2^ Currently,
the genetic diversity of HIV-1 in the worldwide epidemic is
characterized by four groups, M, N, O, and P. ^3^ The group M is the
leading cause of the global epidemics and is composed of nine subtypes
(A,B, C, D, F, G, H, J, and K), ^3^ more than 49 circulating recombinant
forms (CRFs), and 100 unique recombinant forms (URFs). ^4\ --\ 6^ While
subtype B is the predominant strain in the developed countries, the
non-B subtypes as well as CRFs and URFs are the major epidemic strains
characterized in the African region. ^7\ --\ 30^ In sub-Saharan Africa,
multiple HIV-1 subtypes are found along with various CRFs such as
CRF01-AE in Central Africa and CRF02-AG in West Africa.
^7\ ,\ 9\ ,\ 15\ ,\ 16\ ,\ 31\ --\ 37^

In Nigeria, studies have shown a diversified HIV-1 epidemic with the
viral subtype G, CRF06-cpx, CRF02-AG, sub-subtype A3, and other
recombinants cocirculating. ^16\ ,\ 18\ ,\ 34\ ,\ 38\ --\ 40^ In a study
published in 2000, subtype A was predominant (about 70%) in the
southwest-Lagos state and subtype G was predominant in the
northwest-Kano state (about 58%), while both subtypes A (49%) and G
(47%) were observed to be equally distributed in the northeast
(Maiduguri). ^18^ In 2006, a study in Oyo state (southeast) showed the
predominance of CRF02-AG (57%), subtype G (26%), and CRF06-cpx (11%),
^16^ and similar results with 39--45% for CRF02-AG and 38% for subtype G
were reported in 2009 ^41^ and 2012. ^39^

Characterization of the polymorphisms within the protease (PR) and
reverse transcriptase (RT) genes have been conducted mostly for subtype
B viruses; few studies have been conducted for non-B subtype viruses,
and their impact on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is
undetermined. ^9\ ,\ 29\ ,\ 42\ --\ 46^ Indeed, it has been shown that
differences in codon sequences at positions associated with drug
resistance mutations (DRMs) might predispose viral isolates of different
subtypes to encode different amino acid substitutions that can affect
the rate of emergence of resistance, cross-resistance to same-class
drugs, and potentially drug susceptibility and clinical outcomes.
^8\ ,\ 47^ Data from virological and biochemical analysis revealed that
natural variations in amino acids can affect the degree of drug
resistance (DR) conferred by some mutations. ^48^ It has been shown that
HIV-2 and group O HIV-1 viruses are naturally resistant to nonnucleoside
RT inhibitors (NNRTIs) due to mutations present in their RT gene.
^49\ ,\ 50^ Moreover, differences in nucleotide and mutational motifs
(these are transitions and transversions needed to develop DR to
different antivirals) between subtypes can affect the genetic barrier
for resistance. ^51\ ,\ 52^

One good example of this is the V106M polymorphism in the RT of subtype
C viruses inducing resistance to NNRTIs. ^53^ However, study of the
influence of genetic variability and polymorphisms on HIV-1 DR
development in places where diverse HIV-1 non-B subtypes, CRFs, and URFs
are co-circulating is limited. We undertook this study in Abuja,
Nigeria's capital city, using specimens collected from HIV-1-infected
patients who were eligible for initiation of ART at two treatment sites.
The aims of this analysis were to (1) determine the HIV-1 subtype
distribution in the cohort; (2) identify and characterize baseline
polymorphisms and DRMs at pretreatment and the association of any
specific mutational pattern with HIV-1 subtypes or CRFs; and (3)
evaluate the potential impact of these polymorphisms on DR development.

Go to:


## Materials and Methods

### Specimens

Patients were recruited for a prospective cohort study to monitor HIVDR
development. The median age was 34 years \[interquartile range (IQR),
28--40 years\]; 38% were male, while 62% were female at the time of ART
initiation. The median CD4 count was 149 cells/ *μ* l (IQR, 73--205
cells/ *μ* l) and 72% of participants had a CD4 count of ≤200 cells/ *μ*
l. Detailed demographic and clinical data of this cohort were described
previously. ^54^ The specimens were collected from HIV-infected patients
initiating ART from two sites in Abuja, between January and July 2008.
Samples were systematically collected from all the patients who were
eligible for ART to limit the introduction of bias in the nature and
quantity of polymorphisms and/or DRMs detected.

### RT-PCR and DNA sequencing

Sequences were generated from these plasma specimens using the broadly
sensitive HIV-1 genotyping assay that amplifies the 5′ region of the
HIV-1 *pol* gene including DR mutation sites in the PR and RT regions.
^55^ Sequences were edited with the ReCall program ^56^ and the
consensus sequences were made for further analysis.

### HIV-1 subtype determination and characterization

HIV-1 subtypes and CRFs for the newly obtained 271 sequences were
initially determined by phylogenetic analysis using MEGA 5 ^57^ along
with 109 reference sequences including subtypes A to K and all available
CRFs, downloaded from the Los Alamos HIV sequence database (2010
version, www.hiv.lanl.gov/ ). Neighbor-joining and maximum likelihood
with algorithms of Tamura-Nei were used for the analysis with 1,000
bootstrap replicates. The bootstrap values above 70% were considered
significant. ^58^ For the sequences whose HIV-1 subtypes or CRFs could
not be determined by the initial phylogenetic analysis, pairwise genetic
distances (MEGA ^57^ ), similarity, and bootscan analysis (SimPlot,
v.3.51 ^59^ ) were performed for gene structure (recombination)
analysis. If a segment of the query sequences with a length of \< 200
nucleotides had a similarity of \< 95% to the reference sequences, a U
was assigned to indicate an unclassifiable segment within a sequence;
the relatedness of these unclassifiable sequences to any sequence in the
public database was then determined by using a standard GenBank Blast
search. If the similarity scores were \< 95%, the sequences were
considered not closely related.

The phylogeny of 84 subtype G sequences identified from the initial
subtyping was further assessed by using the MrBayes tool (Geneious,
v.6.1.8, Biomatters Ltd., San Francisco, CA) with the references of
subtype G ( *n* = 36) and other major HIV-1 subtypes ( *n* = 21)
downloaded from the Los Alamos HIV sequence database ( www.hiv.lanl.gov/
). The posterior probabilities of trees were estimated using Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach with a chain length of 1,100,000 and
an HKY85 substitution model. ^60^ Only probability values \> 70% at the
nodes of major clusters were presented in the tree.

### Identification of major drug resistance-associated mutations and natural polymorphisms

Major HIVDR mutations of the 271 quality-assured sequences were
identified by the Calibrated Population Resistance Tool (CPR), version
6.0, deployed at the Stanford HIV drug resistance website (
http://cpr.stanford.edu/cpr.cgi ). Sequences were aligned using Clustal
W (BioEdit version 7.0.9.1, Carlsbad, CA) and were visually compared
across subtypes to identify both synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitutions at polymorphic and/or DR sites in both RT and PR genes,
which also allowed us to determine any subtype-specific mutational
pattern or motif. The mutational motif is defined as the number of
transitions or transversions needed to develop resistance to different
classes of ARVs. ^51\ ,\ 52^ The specific mutational pattern analysis
was focused on the sites that are polymorphic and/or involved in HIVDR
development to any drug class of ARVs.

Go to:


## Results

### HIV-1 subtype distribution

Phylogenetic analyses of the 271 newly obtained nucleotide sequences
along with 109 HIV-1 subtype and CRF reference sequences revealed that
93.7% (254/271) of the sequences could be subtyped with our sequence
analysis procedures while 6.3% (17/271) could not be assigned a standard
subtype or CRF, which were denoted as unclassifiable sequences ( Table 1
). A total of 16 possible types of HIV-1 strains were identified. The
predominant strains were subtype G (31.0%), CRF02-AG (19.2%), and
CRF43-02G (18.5%), accounting for 68.7% of the total sequences analyzed.
The remaining strains (31.3%) were A/CRF36-cpx (11.4%), CRF06-cpx
(5.5%), CRF25-cpx (3.3%), CRF36-cpx (2.2%), A/CRF02-AG (1.5%),
CRF15-01B/G (0.4%), CRF43-02G/G (0.4%), and unclassifiable (6.3%).
Overall, the recombinant viral strains, including CRFs and URFs,
accounted for 68.6%, while pure subtypes (G and C) were only 31.4%.

### TABLE 1

HIV-1 SUBTYPE DISTRIBUTION AMONG 271 SEQUENCES OBTAINED FROM NIGERIAN
HIV-1-INFECTED PATIENTS ELIGIBLE FOR INITIATION OF ANTIRETROVIRAL
THERAPY IN 2008

*Subtype/CRF*

*No.*

*%*

C

1

0.4

**G**

**84**

**31.0**

**CRF02-AG**

**52**

**19.2**

CRF06-cpx

15

5.5

CRF25-cpx

9

3.3

CRF36-cpx

6

2.2

**CRF43-02G**

**50**

**18.5**

A/CRF02-AG

4

1.5

**A/CRF36-cpx**

**31**

**11.4**

CRF15-01B/G

1

0.4

CRF43-02G/G

1

0.4

Unclassifiable (U)

17

6.3

Pure subtypes

85

31.4

CRFs

186

68.6

Open in a separate window

CRF, circulating recombinant form.

The figures in *bold* are subtype or CRFs having higher prevalence.

It is interesting to note that the subtype G sequences identified in
this study ( *n* = 84) exhibited intrasubtype diversity by segregating
into two large distinct clusters in the initial phylogenetic analysis
(data not shown). To further understand the diversity of these G
sequences, we analyzed them with all available subtype G reference
sequences from the Los Alamos database. Results indicated that the G
sequences mainly formed three major and two minor clusters ( Fig. 1 ).
For description purpose, we named them G1-3 and Gm1-2, respectively.
Most of the G sequences from this study ( *n* = 64) fell into two of the
three known major subtype G clusters, G1 ( *n* = 19) and G3 ( *n* = 45),
and only one clustered in the G2 along with reference sequences from
other countries. Interestingly, the remaining study sequences formed two
independent minor clusters of Gm1 and Gm2 without clustering with any
sequence from other countries with an exception of two sequences that
didn't group into clusters.

FIG. 1

Phylogenetic analysis of subtype G sequences with HIV-1 reference
sequences. The tree was constructed with 84 newly characterized Nigerian
subtype G sequences and 57 reference sequences downloaded from the Los
Alamos HIV database ( www.hiv.lanl.gov/ ) representing major subtypes (
*n* = 21) of A, B, C, D, F, H, K, and G ( *n* = 36). Only the names of
reference sequences were given in the tree. The number in the *bracket*
gives the year spanning the reference sequences in the cluster or
branch; the number in the *square bracket* indicates the number of
Nigerian sequences in the cluster or branch. The numbers labeled at the
nodes were bootstrapping values. Country code: BE (Belgium), CM
(Cameroon), CN (China), CU (Cuba), ES (Spain), IT (Italy), GH (Ghana),
KE (Kenya), NG (Nigeria), PT (Portugal), and SE (Sweden).

For those 17 sequences that a subtype/CRF could not be assigned, 13
representatives were selected for further analyses. Genetic distance
analysis showed that they were not closely related to any subtype
reference sequences, but had approximately equal distances to two or
multiple subtype sequences ( Table 2 ). Sequence similarity analysis
indicated that they had complicated gene structures with multiple
subtypes involved ( Fig. 2a ). Bootscan analysis further revealed that
eight of them had strong evidence of recombination between multiple
subtypes ( Fig. 2b ). Blast search for closely related sequences in the
GenBank database showed the highest similarity hits were 93--95% to the
GenBank sequences (data not shown), indicating they might be new
recombinant viruses.

FIG. 2

Further characterization of phylogenetically unresolved Nigerian
sequences. The 13 representative Nigerian unclassifiable sequences (
Table 1 ) were further analyzed individually using SimPlot ^59^ for
genetic similarity (200-bp window, 20-bp step, and two-parameter Kimura
algorithm). The selection of HIV-1 reference subtypes for analysis was
based on the genetic distance analysis ( Table 2 ). Only three to four
relevant reference subtypes were chosen to generate the graph to show
the gene structure of query sequences ( **a** ). The *dashed line* was
used to determine the relatedness of the query sequence to the selected
reference subtypes at the 95% similarity threshold across the gene. The
segment of the query sequence with a length of less than 200 nucleotides
and less than 95% similarity to the references was assigned a "U"
indicating an unresolved subtyping for the sequence portion. The
chimeric subtyping of the query sequence was given in each of the
SimPlot diagrams ( **a** ) and populated in Table 2 . To explore the
recombinant events, 8 among the 13 unclassifiable (U) sequences were
again analyzed using the BootScan ^59^ method, demonstrating a clear
recombination event ( **b** ).

### TABLE 2

CHARACTERIZATION OF 13 UNCLASSIFIABLE (U) NIGERIAN HIV-1 SEQUENCES

*Sequence ID*

*Method used for subtyping* ^a^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Possible subtype*

*Phylogenetic tree*

*Genetic distance*

*SimPlot*

5186

CRF43-02G/G

0.0449/0.0593

CRF43-02G/G

CRF43-02G/G

5287

CRF02-AG/CRF36-cpx

0.049/0.049

CRF36/A/CRF36

U/CRF36-cpx

5290

CRF02-AG/CRF36-cpx

0.0605/0.0521

CRF36/CRF06/CRF36

U/CRF36-cpx

5303

CRF02-AG/CRF36-cpx

0.0581/0.0572

A/C/CRF36

U/CRF36-cpx

5298

CRF02-AG/CRF36-cpx

0.0419/0.0431

A/CRF36-cpx

A/CRF36-cpx

5261

CRF02-AG/CRF36-cpx

0.0498/0.0554

A/CRF02-cpx

A/CRF36-cpx

5102

CRF02-AG/CRF45-cpx

0.0644/0.0675

A/K

A/U

5305

CRF15-01B/CRF01-AE

0.0663/0.0764

A/CRF15-01B

A/U

5089

CRF23-BG/CRF19-cpx

0.0669/0.0679

CRF36-cpx/B

U/B

5343

CRF21-A2D/D/CRF19-cpx

0.0621/0.0525/0.0611

U/D

U/D

5202

CRF37-cpx/CRF02-AG/G

0.741/0.0699/0.699

CRF15-01B/G

CRF15-01B/G

5078

CRF36-cpx/CRF43-02G/G

0.0552/0.0598/0.0628

CRF43/CRF36/G

U

5299

CRF36-cpx/CRF43-02G

0.0687/0.0691

CRF43/CRF36/G

U

Open in a separate window

^a^ Details of methodology were described in Materials and Methods.

### HIV-1 drug resistance-associated mutations

Among the 271 sequences analyzed, 28% (76/271) had polymorphisms and/or
primary and/or accessory DRMs in the PR and RT region ( Table 3 ). The
CPR analysis identified the PI mutations M46L, I85V, and F53Y as well as
the NRTI mutations M41L and V75M, and the NNRTI mutations K101E, K103N,
and G190A as Surveillance Drug Resistance Mutations (SDRM). ^61\ ,\ 62^
The total number of detected mutations in the PR was 11, distributed at
9 sites among 11 samples. In the RT, 81 mutations were identified and
distributed at 15 sites among 69 samples. Seven specimens had PI
mutations but no NRTI or NNRTI mutations, while the remaining 69
specimens with resistance-associated mutations had no PI mutations.

### TABLE 3

SUMMARY OF SPECIMENS WITH POLYMORPHISMS AND OR DRUG RESISTANCE MUTATIONS
AT BASELINE

*IDs*

*Subtype*

*Scored resistance mutations*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Resistance level* ^a^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*PR*

*RT*

*Sensitive* ^b^

*Low*

*Intermediate*

*High*

5149

A/CRF02-AG

None

V179I

5292

A/CRF02-AG

None

V179I

5152

A/CRF15-01B

None

V179I

5165

A/CRF15-01B

None

V179I

5313

A/CRF15-01B

None

V179IV

5123

A/CRF15-01B

None

V179I

5305

A/CRF15-01B

None

V90I

5168

A/CRF36-cpx

None

T69N, V106I

5213

A/CRF36-cpx

T74S

T69NT

All remaining PI

NFV

5214

A/CRF36-cpx

None

G190AG

ETR, RPV

EFV

NVP

5225

A/CRF36-cpx

None

T69N, K101E, V108IV, G190A

ETR

RPV

EFV, NVP

5251

A/CRF36-cpx

None

V179AT

5253

A/CRF36-cpx

None

E138A

5312

A/CRF36-cpx

I85V

T69NT

5330

A/CRF36-cpx

None

E138A

5345

A/CRF36-cpx

F53FY

V118I

5217

C

T74S

None

All remaining PIs

NFV

5074

CRF02-AG

None

V90I

5093

CRF02-AG

T74S

None

All remaining PIs

NFV

5169

CRF02-AG

None

T69ST

5188

CRF02-AG

None

E138A

5228

CRF02-AG

None

K103N

ETR, RPV

EFV, NVP

5289

CRF02-AG

None

V118I

5293

CRF02-AG

None

T69ST

5304

CRF02-AG

None

E138A

5306

CRF02-AG

None

E138AE

5183

CRF06-cpx

None

M41L, E44DE, V179E

3TC, ABC, ddI, FTC, TDF

AZT, d4T

5208

CRF06-cpx

None

V90I

5241

CRF06-cpx

None

V179E

5250

CRF06-cpx

None

V179E

5279

CRF06-cpx

None

V179E

5294

CRF06-cpx

None

V179E

5328

CRF06-cpx

None

V179E

5206

CRF25-cpx

A71V

None

5248

CRF25-cpx

None

V179I

5318

CRF25-cpx

None

V179I

5100

CRF36-cpx

None

V179I

5326

CRF36-cpx

None

V118I

5089

CRF36-cpx/B

None

V179I

5223

CRF36-cpx/B

None

V179I

5079

CRF43-02G

None

E138A

5084

CRF43-02G

None

V179EV

5087

CRF43-02G

T74S

None

All remaining PIs

NFV

5106

CRF43-02G

None

V179E

5174

CRF43-02G

None

K101Q

5184

CRF43-02G

None

V118I, E138A

5195

CRF43-02G

None

V179E

5211

CRF43-02G

T74S

T69A

All remaining PIs

NFV

5238

CRF43-02G

None

T69S

5315

CRF43-02G

None

V118IV

5116

G

None

V90I, V179IV

5119

G

None

V118I

5142

G

None

V106I

5161

G

None

V179IMV

5194

G

M46L

None

All remaining PIs

NFV

5201

G

None

E138A

5205

G

None

A98G

EFV, ETR, RPV

NVP

5220

G

None

V75MV, K103R

5222

G

None

V118IV

5226

G

None

V179E

5233

G

None

E138A

5237

G

None

E138AE

5242

G

None

V179E

5247

G

None

V118I

5256

G

None

V118I

5278

G

None

K101Q, K103R

5296

G

None

T69ST

5300

G

None

V106IV, V118IV

5308

G

None

V106I

5314

G

None

M41L, V90I

3TC, ABC, ddI, FTC, TDF

AZT, d4T

5316

G

T74S

None

All remaining PIs

NFV

5336

G

K43KT

None

5338

G

None

V106I, V118IV

5320

G

None

E138A

5325

G

None

E138A

5299

U

None

K101EK, E138A

DLV, ETR

EFV

NVP, RPV

Open in a separate window

^a^ Sensitivity column is filled only when drugs are resistant.

^b^ Potential low level of resistance is classified as sensitive as per
WHO interpretation.

NFV, nelfinavir; EFV, efavirenz; NVP, nevirapine; ETR, etravirine; RPV,
rilpivirine; AZT, zidovudine; d4T, stavudine; ABC, abacavir; 3TC,
lamivudine; ddI, didanosine; FTC, emtricitabine; TDF, tenofovir.

In the PR region, one sample displayed the K43T mutation; another one
had the M46L, while a third specimen had K53Y, A71V, and I85V. The T74S
mutation was found in the PR of six specimens.

We also detected NRTI selected mutations M41L, E44D, T69ANS, V75M, and
V118I, and NNRTI mutations V90I, A98G, K101EQ, K103NR, V106I, V108I,
E138A, V179EI, and G190A ( Table 3 ). Due to the M41L mutation detected
in one specimen, the virus would have reduced susceptibility to
zidovudine (AZT) and stavudine (d4T). Five specimens had A98G, K101EK,
V108IV, K103N, E138A, and G190A occurring alone or in combination with
each other, which could cause intermediate and/or high-level resistance
to delavirdine (DLV), efavirenz (EFV), etravirine (ETR), and nevirapine
(NVP). The mutation E138A associated with a decreased response to ETR,
the second generation NNRTI, was found in 16% (12/76) of the specimens
displaying DR mutations. There were only three specimens that had DR
mutations associated with two combined drug classes (NRTIs plus NNRTIs).
The overall resistance rate within the cohort was \< 3% and the affected
drugs were one PI \[nelfinavir, (NFV)\], two NRTIs (AZT and d4T), and
five NNRTIs \[EFV, DLV, ETR, rilpivirine (RPV), and NVP\].

Among all the mutations detected, T74S (54.5%) in PR and E138A (17%),
V179I (16%), followed by V118I and V179E (14% each) in RT were the most
prevalent, while T69NS, V90I, and V106I were present at only 5% each.
Within the cohort, the rate of these mutations was 2.2% for T74S, 4% for
V118I and V179E each, 4.5% for V179I, and 5% for E138A. The prevalence
for T69NS, V90I, and V106I was 1.5%, respectively. L89T/I, the
nonpolymorphic PI-selected mutation of uncertain phenotypic and clinical
significance was also detected.

### Natural polymorphisms

Of the 271 sequences analyzed, 11 polymorphic mutations (G16E, K20I,
L23P, E35D, M36I, N37D/S/T, R57K, L63P, and V82I) in the PR and 3 (D123N
and I135T/V) in the RT were identified. According to the Stanford DR
algorithm, these substitutions occurred in the wild type (WT) of non-B
subtype viruses and have no effect on DR for PIs or RTIs; however, when
combined with other mutations, they increase the resistance to PIs or
RTIs in subtype B viruses.

### Uncommon mutations

Numerous uncommon mutations with unknown impact and/or function within
the PR and the RT were identified. In PR, 58 uncommon mutations were
detected at 28 positions, while in RT the number was 96 at 58 positions.
Some of these mutations occurred at a very high rate and were subtype
specific in the PR gene. For example, the E35Q mutation occurred in 67%
of all subtype G sequences and in only 5% of CRF02-AG sequences, but was
absent in all other subtypes and CRFs. E35K occurred in 5% of CRF02-AG
but was absent in the rest of the other subtypes. However, in the RT
gene, we did not detect a high prevalence of an uncommon mutation or
subtype-specific mutational pattern. The random mutation rates ranged
from 0.5% to 15%.

### Synonymy and subtype-specific codon mutational pattern

We next performed a codon-by-codon comparison of the nucleotide
sequences of subtype B (HXB2) to the sequences in the cohort to detect
any subtype-specific mutational patterns ( Table 4 ). We found that at
position 179 of the RT gene, all sequences of CRF06-cpx (6/6), subtype G
(2/2), and CRF43-02G (2/2) harbored the V179E mutation, while all
sequences of CRF36-cpx (1/1), A/CRF02-AG (2/2), CRF36-cpx/B (2/2),
A/CRF15-01B (4/4), and CRF25-cpx (2/2) had the V179I mutation. The WT
CRF06-cpx and subtype G mainly had a codon GTG at position 179, while
the WT of the other subtypes and CRFs possessed the GTT at this position
except for CRF36-cpx, which had a codon ATA.

### TABLE 4

CHANGES OF CODON PATTERN AT POSITION 179 OF THE REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE

*Position 179 nucleotides*

*IDs---amino acid*

*Subtypes*

GTT

HXB2-V

B

GTG/GTA

G-V

G

CRF02-AG-V

CRF02-AG

CRF06-cpx-V

CRF06-cpx

GAG

5106-E

CRF43-02G

GAA

5195-E

CRF43-02G

GAG

5242-E

G

GAG

5226-E

G

GAG

5183-E

CRF06-cpx

GAG

5241-E

CRF06-cpx

GAG

5250-E

CRF06-cpx

GAG

5328-E

CRF06-cpx

GAG

5294-E

CRF06-cpx

GAG

5279-E

CRF06-cpx

ATA

5100-I

CRF36-cpx

ATT

5149-I

A/CRF02-AG

ATT

5292-I

A/CRF02-AG

ATT

5089-I

CRF36-cpx/B

ATT

5223-I

CRF36-cpx/B

ATT

5152-I

A/CRF15-01B

ATT

5165-I

A/CRF15-01B

ATT

5313-I

A/CRF15-01B

ATT

5123-I

A/CRF15-01B

ATT

5248-I

CRF25-cpx

ATT

5318-I

CRF25-cpx

Open in a separate window

Go to:


## Discussion

We have analyzed the PR and RT regions of the *pol* gene of 271
sequences generated from plasma specimens collected from ART-naive
HIV-1-infected patients initiating ART in Abuja, Nigeria in 2008.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that recombinant viruses have become the
dominant strains over pure subtypes. The subtype G viruses have further
diversified into three major subtype G clusters using worldwide
sequences, and most Nigerian sequences from this study were closely
related to two of the three clusters ( Fig. 1 , G1 and G3), indicating a
close epidemiological relationship of HIV epidemics between Nigeria and
countries in Europe, West Africa, and Asia during the periods of
1992--2004 (G1) and 2000--2009 (G3), respectively. We also noticed that
the HIV-1 strains in the G2 cluster formed by sequences obtained from
countries in Europe, East and West Africa, and South America from 1993
to 2009 had a minimal impact to the HIV epidemic in Nigeria, and strains
in the two minor clusters, Gm1 and Gm2, appear to be indigenous viruses
that had no relationship to the HIV subtype G strains circulating in
other countries.

The three major subtype G clusters were reported previously as G ~WA-I~
, G ~WA-II~ , and G ~CA~ ^6\ ,\ 22\ ,\ 63^ However, within a G cluster,
different strains may be present. For example, in the G3 cluster, there
are possibly four different strains, denoted as G3A--D ( Fig. 1 ), while
strain G3C and G3D seem to circulate only in Nigeria. Studies have
suggested that subtype G emerged in Central Africa in 1968 (1956--1976),
and between the middle and late 1970s two subtype G strains were
probably introduced into Nigeria. ^63^ Since then, they were
disseminated locally and to neighboring countries, leading to the origin
of two major western African clades (G ~WA-I~ and G ~WA-II~ ). For the
strains in the two minor clusters of Gm1 and Gm2, we have not identified
any phylogenetic relationship of these strains to those from other
countries (\> 95% similarity) or to those detected in other regions of
the country (data not shown), indicating that they might be newly
emerging and locally circulating only in the Abuja area.

We also observed an evolved subtype distribution in the country. Prior
to 2000, subtypes A (61%) and G (31%) were dominant in the south and
north, respectively, and CRF02-AG was not detected in the country. ^18^
However, after 2000, studies revealed that the prevalence of subtype A
was greatly reduced with a slight reduction of subtype G and a
remarkable increase of CRF02-AG (39--57%). ^16\ ,\ 34\ ,\ 38\ --\ 41^ In
this study, we did not detect pure subtype A and had rates for subtype G
(31.0%) and CRF02-AG (19.2%) detected in the capital area of Abuja
similar to those detected in other areas, which is in agreement with the
subtype distribution patterns reported in the country.
^16\ ,\ 34\ ,\ 38\ ,\ 39^ Our data and other studies suggest that among
the two previously dominant subtypes, one (subtype A) is disappearing
and the other (subtype G) is still playing an important role but is
circulating at different rates in the country. Meanwhile the progeny
(CRF02-AG) of subtypes A and G are emerging quickly in the HIV epidemic
in the country. In addition, CRF43-02G is becoming one of the dominant
subtypes in Abuja, which was not reported in other areas of the country.
Nevertheless, the majority of the current circulating HIV strains were
derived from the subtypes or recombinant forms between subtypes A and G,
again indicating localized transmission and circulation.

The overall pretreatment HIVDR rate in the cohort was less than 3%,
which is expected due to the short time of ART implementation in the
country at the time of the study. This rate is in agreement with the
rates reported in Jos, in the Plateau State, ^40^ and the North Central
region of Nigeria. In the protease region, one sample displayed the K43T
mutation, which was associated with a decreased virological response to
tipranavir boosted with ritonavir (TPV/r) in the RESIST trials. ^64^ One
sample harbored the M46L mutation, which is a primary mutation inducing
an intermediate level of resistance to NFV. A rare treatment-associated
mutation K53Y, the polymorphic mutation A71V, as well as the PI-selected
mutation I85V were also found in one sample each. Six specimens had the
T74S mutation that induces a potential low level of resistance
\[classified as sensitive per the World Health Organization (WHO)
interpretation\] ^65^ to PIs.

We also identified subtype/CRF-specific mutation patterns in the PR and
RT gene regions. For instance, K20I in the PR region was present in all
subtypes and CRFs except for eight sequences that were all subtype
A-containing recombinants. ^34^ The polymorphic mutations M36I, L63P,
V82I, and M89I were proportionately present in the sequences of
CRF02-AG, CRF43-02G, and CRF06-cpx and subtype G. A study has shown that
the polymorphic mutation M36I in the PR region was associated with a
higher rate of PI treatment failure. ^66^ Furthermore, biochemical
studies of this mutation with subtypes A and C recombinant I36 PR
revealed that the PR enzymes of non-subtype B viruses have a higher
inhibition constant ( *K* ~i~ ) and a greater catalytic efficiency than
subtype B viruses ^67^ and that introduction of I36 into subtype B HIV-1
resulted in a higher virus replication capacity in both the absence and
presence of PIs. ^7^ In addition, we found that mutations E35D, N37DST,
R57K, and K70R in the PR and D123N and I135TV in the RT were present at
high rates in this cohort. These mutations have been shown to be
associated with increased or decreased DR to some ARVs. ^68\ --\ 70^
Several other mutations observed in this study were not classically
associated with resistance and their biological functionality remains to
be elucidated. Since some of the uncommon mutations occurred at a very
high frequency in a subtype/CRF-specific manner, they may warrant
further investigation to determine their biological functions within the
virus genome.

The analysis of the mutational pattern suggests that the V179I mutation
in the RT is not only the preferred mutation in subtype B viruses, but
also occurs in non-B subtypes and CRFs. Subtype G, CRF43-02G, and
CRF06-cpx viruses utilized the codon GTG/GTA to encode valine and more
likely to develop V179E mutations, ^16\ ,\ 34\ ,\ 38\ ,\ 39\ ,\ 71^
whereas other CRF viruses are biased toward V179I and V179D. This
pattern of amino acid substitution by a single nucleotide change is
called quasisynonymy; it may explain the high rate of the V179E found in
subtype G and CRF06-cpx in this cohort and is concordant with published
data and statistics predicting the occurrence of this mutation at RT
position 179 of these viruses. ^16\ ,\ 71\ ,\ 72^

In summary, this study has shown an evolving HIV-1 epidemic in Abuja,
with recombinant viruses becoming the prevailing strains and locally
circulating strains emerging. This evolving trend in the HIV-1 epidemic
deserves closer monitoring since a recent study has shown that a
recombinant HIV-1 sub-subtype A3 and CRF02-AG virus was more virulent
than the original viral strains. ^73^ In addition, it has also confirmed
that the occurrence of DR may be influenced by quasisynonymy and the
genetic cost of mutations.

Go to:


## Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief (PEPFAR) through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention/the Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry.

Go to:


## Footnotes

**Sequence Data**

The GenBank accession numbers for sequences analyzed in this study are
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide-range\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"JX083986-JX084256\",\"start_term\":\"JX083986\",\"end_term\":\"JX084256\",\"start_term_id\":\"440355383\",\"end_term_id\":\"440355923\"}}
JX083986-JX084256 .

**Author Disclosure Statement**

No competing financial interests exist.

Go to:
