# High Prevalence of the K65R Mutation in HIV-1 Subtype C Infected Patients Failing Tenofovir-Based First-Line Regimens in South Africa

## Abstract

### Background

Tenofovir (TDF) has replaced stavudine (d4T) as the preferred nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) in first-line regimens in South
Africa, but limited information is available on the resistance patterns
that develop after the introduction of TDF. This study investigated the
antiretroviral drug resistance patterns in South African HIV-1 subtype
C-infected patients failing stavudine- (d4T) and tenofovir- (TDF) based
first-line regimens and assess the suitability of TDF as the preferred
first-line nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI).

### Methods

Resistance patterns of HIV-1 from 160 adult patients virologically
failing TDF- (n = 80) and d4T- (n = 80) based first-line regimens were
retrospectively analyzed. The *pol* gene was sequenced using an in-house
protocol and mutations were analysed using the IAS-USA 2014 Drug
Resistance Mutation list.

### Results

Compared to d4T-exposed patients (n = 7), patients failing on a
TDF-containing regimen (n = 43) were almost 5 times more likely to
present with a K65R mutation (aRR 4.86 95% CI 2.29 -- 10.34). Y115F was
absent in the d4T group, and detected in 13.8% (n = 11) of TDF-exposed
patients, p = 0.0007. Virus from 9 of the 11 patients (82.0%) who
developed the Y115F mutation also developed K65R. Intermediate or
high-level resistance to most NRTIs was common in the TDF-treatment
group, but these patients twice more likely to remain susceptible to AZT
as compared to those exposed to d4T (aRR 2.09 95% CI 1.13 -- 3.90).

### Conclusion

The frequency of the TDF induced K65R mutation was higher in our setting
compared to non-subtype C dominated countries. However, despite the
higher frequency of cross-resistance to NRTIs, most patients remained
susceptible to AZT, which is reflected in the South African treatment
guidelines that recommend AZT as an essential component of second-line
regimens.



## Methods

### Study design and patients

HIV drug resistance results obtained between January 2010 and August
2012 from adult patients failing ART were retrieved from the database at
the HIV Genotyping Laboratory at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic
Hospital (CMJAH), South Africa. Only patients on d4T- (n = 80) or
TDF-based (n = 80) first-line regimens with at least one resistance
mutation were randomly selected and included in this study. Demographic
and clinical data collected from laboratory request forms or the
laboratory information system (LIS) included age, gender, viral load,
CD4 cell count, antiretroviral drug treatment regimen and duration on
failing treatment.

### Pol genotyping and resistance mutation analysis

Viral RNA was extracted from 500μl of plasma using the automated EasyMag
system (Biomerieux, Marcy I'Etoile, France) according to manufacturer's
instructions. The *reverse transcriptase* and *protease* regions of the
virus were amplified using an in-house resistance testing assay as
previously described \[ 11 , 12 \]. Samples that could not be amplified
using the in-house assay were amplified using the ViroSeq HIV-1
Genotyping System Version 2.0 (Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, USA)
according to manufacturer's instructions. The lower limit of detection
of all genotyping methods was 1000 RNA copies/ml. Sequences were
manually edited using Sequencher version 4.8 (Genecodes, MI, USA) or
ViroSeq version 2.8 software (Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, USA) and
subsequently submitted to the ViroScore database (Advanced Biological
Laboratories (ABL), South Africa) which used the Stanford HIV database
version 7.0 for the identification of the HIV-1 drug resistance
mutations based on the International AIDS Society 2014 mutation list \[
13 \]. The resistance profile was categorized according to the level of
resistance conferred by the mutations. Three main categories are used in
this analysis: high-level resistance (R), intermediate resistance (I,
combines intermediate and low-level resistance) and total susceptibility
(S, combines susceptible and potential low-level resistance calls).
Subtypes were determined using the REGA subtyping tool v2.0 \[ 14 \].
Mega version 5 software \[ 15 \] was used to construct a phylogenetic
tree to ensure that no longitudinal patient samples were included in the
analysis.

### Sequence Data

The *pol* nucleotide sequences were submitted to GenBank using Sequin
v9.50 ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Sequin ) and are available under accession
numbers
KM115717 to KM115876 .

### Statistical analysis

GraphPad software (GraphPad Inc, USA) was used to perform Fischer's
exact test. A p-value of \<0.05 was considered statistically
significant. Log-binomial regression analysis was used to test the
association between different mutations and NRTI (TDF vs. d4T) or NNRT
(EFV vs. NVP) pressure. The relative risk (RR) and corresponding 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were calculated. Mutations identified as being
significantly associated with drug pressure in the univariate analysis
(p\<0.2) and priori variables of importance were included in
multivariate models. Models were adjusted (aRR) for CD4 count, viral
load and time on ART where possible, which is limited by the number of
observations in each cell after stratification.

### Ethics Statement

This study was conducted with Ethical clearance by the Research on Human
Subjects (Medical) Committee at the University of the Witwatersrand
(Clearance Number M120730). Due to the retrospective nature of this
study, no informed consent was obtained from the patients. This is in
line with the Research on Human Subjects (Medical) Committee policy
which states informed consent is not required for this type of study and
a waiver was hence granted.

Go to:


## Results

One hundred and sixty (n = 160) sequences were included for analysis.
These sequences were obtained from patients failing d4T+3TC+EFV/NVP (n =
80) and patients failing TDF+3TC+EFV/NVP (n = 80). HIV-1 subtype C was
the dominant subtype (99.4%, n = 159), with only one patient being
infected with an unassigned subtype (0.6%) The median age of patients
was 36 years, (range: 16--62) and most patients were female (n = 112,
70.0%). The median time on the failing treatment was 38 months (range:
0.5--95 months) for the patients exposed to d4T and 12 months (range:
0.5--50 months) for the TDF-exposed patients (p\<0.0001). The patient
demographics and clinical characteristics are summarized in Table 1 .


The most common NRTI mutation in both the d4T- and TDF-exposed patients
was M184V/I (n = 74, 92.5% and n = 72, 90.0% respectively), with M184V
as the predominant mutation ( Fig. 1 ). The K70E mutation, which is
known to be selected under TDF pressure, was present in 10 (12.5%) of
the TDF-exposed patients as compared to only two (2.5%) of the
d4T-exposed patients (not significant). K70R was more frequently
detected in d4T-exposed patients (15.0%, n = 12) as compared to the
TDF-exposed group (8.8%, n = 7) but again, the difference was not
significant. Compared to d4T-exposed patients (n = 7), patients failing
on a TDF-containing regimen (n = 43) were almost 5 times more likely to
have a K65R mutation detected (aRR 4.86 95% CI 2.29--10.34, Table 2 ).
Y115F was absent in the d4T group, and detected in 13.8% (n = 11) of
TDF-exposed patients, p = 0.0007. Nine of the 11 patients (82.0%) who
developed the Y115F also developed the K65R mutation. The Q151M mutation
was detected in five (6.3%) d4T-exposed patients, and in one of these
patients Q151M occurred in combination with K65R. Similarly, only one
(1.3%) TDF-exposed patient carried Q151M, co-existing with K65R, but
this difference was not statistically significant.

Fig 1

**Prevalence of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor mutations and
thymidine analogue mutations (TAMs) in tenofovir (TDF; black) and
stavudine (d4T, white) treatment groups.**

The mutations that were not detected in either treatment groups are not
included in the graph. The numbers represent percentages. P1: TAM
pathway 1, P2: TAM pathway 2, P1+2: combination of TAM pathway 1 and 2.


Log-binomial regression analysis was used and the model was adjusted
with CD4, VL and time on treatment where possible. Adjusted relative
risk was only calculated for N: Number of patients; RR: relative risk;
CI: confidence interval; VL: RNA Viral Load; ART: antiretroviral
treatment; 3TC: lamivudine; FTC: emtricitabine; ABC: abacavir; AZT:
zidovudine; d4T: stavudine; ddI: didanosine; TDF: tenofovir; EFV:
efavirenz; ETR: etravirine; NVP: nevirapine; RPV: rilpivirine; S:
susceptible; IR: intermediate resistance; HR: high-level resistance; ND:
not done

At least one Thymidine Analogue Mutation (TAM) was detected in 27.5% (n
= 22) of the patients exposed to TDF and 31.3% (n = 25) of the
d4T-exposed patients ( Fig. 1 ). The accumulation of more than three
TAMs was more common in d4T-exposed patients (n = 14, 17.5%) compared to
TDF-exposed patients (n = 6, 7.5%) but the difference was not
statistically significant. None of the four TDF-exposed patients who
developed more than three TAMs were known to have had prior exposure to
d4T. The TAM-2 pathway was the principal pathway in both groups, as
20.0% (n = 16) patients in each group followed this pathway. In three
TDF-treated patients (3.8%) and seven d4T-treated patients (8.8%) a
combination of both TAM-1 and TAM-2 pathways was detected ( Fig. 1 ).
Six (7.5%) TDF-exposed patients and two (2.5%) patients failing a
d4T-regimen harboured the K65R mutation in combination with TAMs. All
the individual TAMs, except L210W, occurred more frequently in
d4T-exposed patients ( Fig. 1 ); however the difference was not
statistically significant.

The K103N mutation was the most common non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) mutation. This mutation was more common
in the EFV group (58.7%, 54 of 92) compared to the NVP group (38.2%, 26
of 68), (aRR 1.43 95% CI 1.02--2.01) ( Fig. 2 , Table 2 ). Compared to
patients in the NVP group (n = 8), patients under EFV pressure (n = 40)
were 3.5 times more likely to present with a V106M mutation (aRR 3.53
95% CI 1.77--7.05, Fig. 2 and Table 2 ). In contrast the Y181C mutation
was found in 47.1% (n = 32) and 6.5% (n = 6) of the NVP and EFV group
respectively (aRR 0.16 95% CI 0.08--0.35, Fig. 2 and Table 2 ). The
frequency of the P225H mutation was significantly higher in the patients
taking EFV (16 of 92, 17.4%) compared to the NVP treatment group (3 of
68, 4.4%, aRR 4.68 95% CI 1.43--15.37, Fig. 2 and Table 2 ).

Fig 2

**Prevalence of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor mutations
after exposure to nevirapine (NVP) containing regimen (n = 68, black)
and efavirenz (EFV) containing regimen (n = 92, white).**

The mutations that were not detected in either treatment groups are not
included. The numbers represent percentages.

The antiretroviral drug resistance profiles observed in both groups are
depicted in Fig. 3 . TDF exposure caused development of high-level
resistance to TDF in 56.3% (n = 45) of patients, while 20.0% (n = 16) of
the patients in this group showed intermediate resistance to TDF.
Compared to d4T-exposed patients, those exposed to TDF were more likely
to develop high-level resistance to TDF (aRR 4.41 95% CI 2.18--8.91,
Table 2 ). TDF-exposed patients were less likely to remain fully
susceptible to d4T (aRR 0.40 95% CI 0.22--0.69) and 2.8 times more
likely to develop intermediate resistance to d4T (aRR 2.83, 95% CI
1.61--4.96, Table 2 ). Exposure to TDF increased the relative risk of
developing high-level resistance to ABC (aRR 1.96 95% CI 1.06--3.61) and
ddI (aRR 2.09 95% CI 1.13--3.90, Table 2 ) compared to exposure to d4T.
High-level resistance to (AZT) was more often observed in the
d4T-treatment group (20.0%, n = 16) compared to the TDF group (6.3%, n =
5), (p = 0.003). Intermediate resistance to AZT was detected in 15.0% (n
= 12) of patients taking d4T and 8.8% (n = 7) of the TDF-treatment
group. More importantly, patients exposed to TDF were twice more likely
to remain fully susceptible to AZT as compared to those exposed to d4T
(aRR 2.09 95% CI 1.13--3.90).


Prevalence of susceptible (S, dotted bars), intermediate (I, striped
bars) or high-level resistance (R, solid bars) to NRTIs and NNRTIs after
exposure to a tenofovir (TDF) containing regimen (n = 80, black) or
stavudine (d4T) containing regimen (n = 80, white). The numbers
represent percentages. 3TC: lamivudine; FTC: emtricitabine; ABC:
abacavir; AZT: zidovudine; d4T: stavudine; ddI: didanosine; TDF:
tenofovir; EFV: efavirenz; ETR: etravirine; NVP: nevirapine; RPV:
rilpivirine.

High-level resistance to etravirine (ETR) was observed in low numbers in
both the TDF and d4T treatment groups. Only 8.8% (n = 7) of the
d4T-exposed patients and 12.5% (n = 10) of the TDF patients presented
with high-level resistance to ETR. Almost one in four from the
d4T-exposed group (n = 19, 23.8%) and 1 in three patients in the
TDF-exposed group (n = 24, 30.0%) presented with high-level resistance
to RPV. Intermediate resistance to ETR and RPV was observed in 60.0% (n
= 48) and 47.5% (n = 38) of the TDF-treated patients and 42.5% (n = 34)
and 43.8% (n = 35) of the d4T-exposed patients.




## Discussion

In recent years, South Africa has shown significant progress in
initiating HIV-infected patients on ART. However, like other African
countries, South Africa has a limited number of antiretroviral drug
options available; therefore it is necessary to monitor the HIV-1 drug
resistance patterns that develop under the current treatment regimens,
and to assess the suitability of available second line regimens. In this
respect the antiretroviral drug resistance profiles among d4T-treated
patients were compared with the resistance patterns developed under TDF
pressure.

Since TDF is a recent addition to South African ART guidelines, the
finding that duration of treatment was significantly longer in the d4T
group, when compared to the TDF group, was an expected one. Although the
development of TAMs has been associated with prolonged treatment failure
\[ 16 \], no association was found between the development of any TAMs
in either treatment group, although the development of ≥ 3 TAMs which
was slightly more common in the d4T-group. This finding is consistent
with previous reports from South Africa, where the prevalence of ≥ 3TAMs
in patients failing a d4T-based regimen was found to be between 12.0 and
17.7% \[ 17 , 18 \]. Parikh et al. have previously shown an antagonistic
association between TAMs and K65R \[ 19 \]. This was confirmed by our
data as only 6.2% and 1.2% of the patients, exposed to TDF and d4T
respectively, developed both K65R and TAMs. More than half of the
patients failing a TDF-based regimen developed the K65R mutation as
compared to only 8.8% in the d4T-group, which translates into an almost
5-fold risk of developing K65R after TDF exposure. Similar results were
observed by two recent South African studies \[ 7 , 8 \], whereas the
prevalence of K65R was substantially lower in a third South African
study \[ 9 \]. In the latter study a K65R prevalence of 23% was detected
among patients presenting with at least one drug resistance mutation.
The treatment duration in this study was 261 days (8.7 months) compared
to 12 months in our TDF-exposed group. In addition the patients in
Hoffmann's study received more frequent viral load monitoring, which is
likely to contribute to earlier detection of virological failure. A
similar prevalence of K65R, compared to Hoffmann et al. was found in a
Sub-Sahara African cohort where the mutation was detected in 27.7% of
patients failing TDF-containing regimens and 15.0% of patients failing
d4T-containing regimens \[ 20 \]. A study conducted in Nigeria suggested
that TDF-exposed patients infected with HIV-1 subtype G or CRF02_AG were
less likely to develop K65R (14%) \[ 18 \]. Similarly, K65R was only
found in 17% of TDF-experienced subtype B infected patients \[ 21 \].
The high frequency of K65R in our study was expected, as 98% of the
study population was infected with a subtype C virus and the development
of K65R is subtype dependent \[ 22 -- 25 \].

Y115F was absent in the d4T-exposed patients and detected in 13.8% of
the TDF-exposed patients, which confirms the findings of a recent South
African study \[ 8 \]. This Y115F mutation is known to develop under ABC
pressure \[ 26 \], however none of the patients in our study population
were exposed to ABC. *In vitro* experiments with TDF-3TC exposure showed
that Y115F is commonly selected after the development of K65R \[ 27 \],
which is reflected in our data as K65R was present in nine out of 11 of
the patients with Y115F. The sole presence of K65R causes intermediate
resistance to TDF \[ 28 \] whereas the combination with Y115F increases
the level of resistance, as was observed in 10% of the TDF-exposed
patients. Over 90% of the TDF-exposed patients had some level of
resistance to three or more NRTIs. This is in contrast to what has been
reported in a recent Nigerian study \[ 29 \], highlighting that HIV-1
subtype is one of the factors affecting resistance and mutation patterns
\[ 30 \]. However, 86.3% (n = 69) of the patients failing a TDF-based
regimen remained completely susceptible to AZT, which is a core
component of the recommended 2 ^nd^ -line regimen.

Our data shows that fewer TDF-exposed patients remained fully
susceptible to the second generation NNRTIs ETR and RPV as compared to
those patients exposed to d4T-regimens. Nonetheless, in less than 13.0%
of the TDF-exposed patients, high-level resistance to these
second-generation NNTRIs was detected.

This study had certain limitations, namely the fact that it was a
retrospective analysis of routine laboratory data with limited clinical
data and, occasionally, incomplete antiretroviral treatment history. In
some cases this may have led to incorrect categorization of the patients
with regards to their ART exposure. In the absence of national HIV-1
drug resistance testing guidelines, the dataset may be biased towards
sampling patients under the care of clinicians reliant on HIV-1 drug
resistance testing for clinical management and may not provide a
proportional representation of patients failing ART in South Africa.

Overall, these results demonstrate that the frequency of the K65R
mutation is higher in South African HIV-1 subtype C infected patients
when compared to other countries where non-subtype C viruses dominate
the epidemic. High-level resistance to NRTIs, which are the backbone of
1 ^st^ - and 2 ^nd^ - line treatment in South Africa, was more
frequently observed after TDF-exposure compared to d4T-exposure. Despite
the NRTI cross-resistance caused by K65R, most patients remained
susceptible to AZT regardless of d4T or TDF-exposure. This is reflected
in the South African treatment guidelines, which recommend AZT as an
essential component of 2 ^nd^ line regimens \[ 31 \]. Based on these
results, TDF remains a relatively good option for first-line regimens in
HIV-1 subtype C infected patients. However, the high prevalence of the
K65R mutation leaves few choices to recycle NRTIs in third-line and
salvage regimens.



## Data Availability

The pol nucleotide sequences were submitted to GenBank using Sequin
v9.50 ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Sequin ) and are available under accession
numbers KM115717 to KM115876.
