# Pretreatment HIV Drug Resistance and HIV-1 Subtype C Are Independently Associated With Virologic Failure: Results From the Multinational PEARLS (ACTG A5175) Clinical Trial

## Abstract

***Background.*** Evaluation of pretreatment HIV genotyping is needed
globally to guide treatment programs. We examined the association of
pretreatment (baseline) drug resistance and subtype with virologic
failure in a multinational, randomized clinical trial that evaluated 3
antiretroviral treatment (ART) regimens and included resource-limited
setting sites.

***Methods.*** *Pol* genotyping was performed in a nested case-cohort
study including 270 randomly sampled participants (subcohort), and 218
additional participants failing ART (case group). Failure was defined as
confirmed viral load (VL) \>1000 copies/mL. Cox proportional hazards
models estimated resistance--failure association.

***Results.*** In the representative subcohort (261/270 participants
with genotypes; 44% women; median age, 35 years; median CD4 cell count,
151 cells/µL; median VL, 5.0 log ~10~ copies/mL; 58% non-B subtypes),
baseline resistance occurred in 4.2%, evenly distributed among treatment
arms and subtypes. In the subcohort and case groups combined (466/488
participants with genotypes), used to examine the association between
resistance and treatment failure, baseline resistance occurred in 7.1%
(9.4% with failure, 4.3% without). Baseline resistance was significantly
associated with shorter time to virologic failure (hazard ratio \[HR\],
2.03; *P* = .035), and after adjusting for sex, treatment arm,
sex--treatment arm interaction, pretreatment CD4 cell count, baseline
VL, and subtype, was still independently associated (HR, 2.1; *P* =
.05). Compared with subtype B, subtype C infection was associated with
higher failure risk (HR, 1.57; 95% confidence interval \[CI\],
1.04--2.35), whereas non-B/C subtype infection was associated with
longer time to failure (HR, 0.47; 95% CI, .22--.98).

***Conclusions.*** In this global clinical trial, pretreatment
resistance and HIV-1 subtype were independently associated with
virologic failure. Pretreatment genotyping should be considered whenever
feasible.

***Clinical Trials Registration.***
NCT00084136 .

**Keywords:** HIV, drug resistance, subtype, clinical trial


## METHODS

### Participants and Study Design

PEARLS (ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT00084136 ) was a multinational, phase 4, randomized, open-label
clinical trial, conducted in Brazil, Haiti, India, Malawi, Peru, South
Africa, Thailand, the United States, and Zimbabwe \[ 15 \]. Major
enrollment criteria included age \>18 years, HIV infection, CD4 count
\<300 cells/µL, and ART naive by self-report and medical records review
(\<7 days of cumulative drug exposure prior to enrollment). Single-dose
nevirapine (sdNVP) or zidovudine (ZDV) for prevention of mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT) was allowed. During 2005--2007, 1571 eligible
participants were enrolled and randomly assigned to 1 of 3 treatment
arms: arm A: efavirenz (EFV) + coformulated ZDV-lamivudine (3TC), n =
519; arm B: atazanavir (ATV) + didanosine (ddI) + emtricitabine (FTC), n
= 526; arm C: EFV + coformulated FTC--tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
(TDF), n = 526. For management of ARV toxicity, the study provided the
following drugs as substitutes for randomized therapy: stavudine or TDF
for ZDV, ddI for TDF, and NVP for EFV. Follow-up was completed in May
2010.

Personnel at all sites received standardized training in adherence
counseling and adherence assessment prior to study initiation. Trained
site personnel provided adherence counseling at study entry and as
needed thereafter using a checklist that included covered information
about adherence, motivational training, and adherence skills (eg,
scheduling and techniques for remembering). Adherence counseling was
provided to participants with virologic failure, but the protocol did
not specify that the adherence counseling occur between the 2 viral load
(VL) measurements \[ 15 \]. Adherence data at each visit were collected
via self-report using a standardized questionnaire administered in local
languages (ACTG QOL0061, adapted from Chesney et al \[ 16 \]). Adherence
data over the first 12 weeks of study follow-up (ie, prior to initial
measurement of virologic failure at week 16) were summarized into a
dichotomous indicator variable representing either no problems or
any/some adherence problems.

Low prevalence of baseline resistance was assumed. Therefore, genotyping
was not performed for the entire study population (n = 1571). Instead, a
nested case-cohort study design (Figure ​ (Figure1) 1 ) was employed to
address the study objectives in a large cohort where the outcome (ie,
viral failure) was relatively rare. Baseline samples were obtained from
2 groups: (1) subcohort group: a subset of 270 participants randomly
selected from the total study population (stratified by treatment arm
and country to provide similar estimation precision). This group was
included in the estimation of baseline resistance and its correlates for
the entire study cohort; and (2) case group: 218 participants not
included in the subcohort group who experienced virologic failure. The
case group was only included in the assessment of associations between
baseline resistance and virologic failure. For this analysis, the case
group was combined with the subcohort group to form the full case cohort
sample (488 participants, 466 who had genotyping results). Covariate
information (including baseline genotype) was collected from the full
case cohort. Because the subcohort group was a random sample chosen
prospectively without regard for virologic failure, the sampling design
simultaneously provided unbiased estimates of baseline resistance.

Figure 1.

A flow diagram of eligible participants included in the case-cohort
analysis. The 270 participants in the subcohort group are a
representative random sample of the 1571 participants enrolled in the
Prospective Evaluation of Antiretrovirals in Resource-Limited Settings
(PEARLS) study. The 218 participants in the case group are participants
who are not part of the subcohort group, who experienced virologic
failure. Abbreviation: ART, antiretroviral treatment.

### Laboratory Methods

VL and CD4 cell count were measured at enrollment and every 8 weeks
throughout the study, as previously described \[ 15 \]. Plasma samples
were stored for genotyping. *Pol* genotyping was performed
retrospectively at 4 regional laboratories that participated in the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Division
of AIDS Virology Quality Assurance program \[ 17 \] using the ViroSeq
HIV-1 Genotyping System (Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, California). The
HIV Prevention Trials Network (HPTN) Laboratory Center coordinated the
genotyping.

### Sequence Analysis

Resistance mutations were assessed using the 2009 WHO mutation list \[
18 \]. HIV-1 subtypes were determined by phylogenetic analysis, using
PHYLIP DNADIST and neighbor-joining programs \[ 19 \], with reference
sequences from the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) Database \[ 20
\]. Based on the resulting output matrix of genetic distance
coefficients, the subtype of the closest reference sequence was taken as
the probable subtype. Sequences with ambiguous subtype calls were
reviewed and manually classified by the LANL recombinant identification
program \[ 20 \]. Sequence quality control was performed with SQUAT \[
21 \].

### Statistical Methods

The association of baseline resistance with other baseline
characteristics of participants was assessed in the subcohort group.
Characteristics included sex, race, age, pretreatment CD4 cell count and
VL, subtype, country, history of AIDS or tuberculosis, hepatitis B
serology, and prior ARV drug use for PMTCT. Fisher exact tests (for
categorical variables) or Wilcoxon rank-sum tests (for continuous
variables) tested association between characteristics and presence of
baseline resistance. Prevalence estimates used exact methods
(Clopper--Pearson) for confidence interval (CI) calculations.

Confirmed virologic failure was defined as having 2 consecutive VLs
\>1000 copies/mL ≥14 weeks after randomization. Association between
resistance and initial confirmed virologic failure was tested in the
full case cohort (Figure ​ (Figure1). 1 ). To handle the case-cohort
sampling design appropriately, a Cox proportional hazards model using
inverse probability weighting was fit to study data. Multivariable
models were built purposefully (ie, investigator request for covariate
inclusion), and testing whether resistance modified the treatment effect
for virologic failure used an interaction term and 2 degrees of freedom
Wald test.

The planned size of the subcohort group (n = 270) was based on the
following assumptions: (1) 5% prevalence of resistance in the full study
cohort; (2) virologic failure in 29% of the 1571 participants in the
full study cohort; and (3) type 1 error of 5%. Based on these
assumptions, the case-cohort design had 80% power to detect a hazard
ratio (HR) of 2.3 or higher for virologic failure between those with vs
those without resistance. Using the same assumed prevalence of
resistance, the estimated precision on prevalence of resistance within
any country (n = approximately 30 participants) was estimated to be
approximately 13 percentage points (or approximately 5 percentage points
across countries). All statistical analyses were performed using SAS
version 9.2 on the UNIX platform.

Go to:


## RESULTS

### Study Participants

Of 1571 participants, 488 (31%) were included in the full case cohort
(Figure ​ (Figure1). 1 ). Genotyping was successful for 261 of 270 (97%)
participants in the subcohort group (51 failed ART) and for 205 of 218
(94%) additional participants in the case group (all failed ART).
Baseline characteristics for participants with genotyping results in the
randomized subcohort group and full case cohort are shown in Table ​
Table1 1 .


### Baseline Resistance in the Subcohort Group and Case Group

In the subcohort group, at least 1 resistance mutation was identified in
11 of 261 (4.2%) participants (95% \[CI\], 2.1%--7.4%) (IDs 1--11, Table
​Table2); 2 ); 7 had nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI)
mutations, 2 had nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)
mutations, and 2 had protease inhibitor (PI) mutations. Six of the 11
(55%) were infected with non-B subtypes; none of the 11 reported prior
ART. The prevalence of resistance did not significantly vary by country
(Table ​ (Table3). 3 ). None of the baseline characteristics examined
(listed in Table ​ Table1) 1 ) were significantly associated with
resistance, overall or by ARV drug class. There was no significant
association with resistance and early self-reported adherence to ART.


Participants with mutations not associated with initial regimens: ID 7,
switched to ZDV+3TC+EFV after 79 weeks on the study regimen and failed
95 weeks after the regimen switch; ID 17, switched to ddI+FTC+EFV after
19 weeks on the study regimen and failed 5 weeks after that regimen
switch; ID 22, switched to ddI+FTC+EFV after 16 weeks on the study
regimen and failed 3 weeks after the regimen switch; ID 16, remained on
study drug and failed treatment after 16 weeks.

The following participants received antiretroviral drugs for prevention
of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) of HIV prior to enrollment: ID
15, received single-dose nevirapine (sdNVP) 16 weeks before enrollment;
ID 20, received sdNVP 11 weeks before enrollment; ID 28, received ZDV
monotherapy 65--70 weeks before enrollment; ID 29, received sdNVP 29
weeks before enrollment.

Abbreviations: 3TC, lamivudine; ATV, atazanavir; ddI, didanosine; EFV,
efavirenz; FTC, emtricitabine; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; ID,
participant number; NNRTI, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor; NRTI, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; PI,
protease inhibitor; TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate; ZDV, zidovudine.


In the case group, at least 1 resistance mutation was identified in 22
of 205 (11%) participants (IDs 12--33, Table ​ Table2). 2 ). All 22
participants had ≥1 NNRTI mutation, 9 (41%) had ≥1 NRTI mutation, and 9
(4.4%) had dual-class resistance. Four of the 22 participants reported
having received ARV drugs for PMTCT.

### Association of Baseline Resistance and Virologic Failure

Virologic failure outcomes by resistance, subtype, and treatment arm
were evaluated using the full case cohort (N = 466; Table ​ Table4). 4 ).
At least 1 resistance mutation was detected in 24 of 256 (9.4%) samples
from participants with virologic failure and 9 of 210 (4.3%) samples
from participants without virologic failure. Among the 24 participants
with resistance who failed ART, 23 (96%) had NNRTI resistance, 9 (38%)
had NRTI resistance, and 1 (4%) had PI resistance. Furthermore, 83%
(20/24) of participants with resistance who failed ART had mutations
associated with drugs in their initial ART regimen. The 4 participants
who did not (IDs 7, 16, 17, and 22) were in treatment arm B and had the
baseline EFV-associated mutation, K103N. Three of these 4 participants
changed to an EFV-containing regimen prior to ART failure.


Eighty-five of the 256 (33%) participants who failed ART experienced ART
failure at the earliest time (week 16 study visit). Eleven of these 85
(13%) had baseline resistance (Table ​ (Table2). 2 ). Median time to
virologic failure among those 256 who failed was 32 weeks (75th
percentile: 68 weeks) and the median time to confirmation of ART failure
was 4 weeks (interquartile range \[IQR\], 2--7 weeks). Among 232
participants without baseline resistance, median VL at failure was 4.2
log ~10~ copies/mL (IQR, 3.6--5.0 log ~10~ copies/mL). Among 24
participants with resistance, the median VL at failure was 4.2 log ~10~
copies/mL (IQR, 3.4--4.7 log ~10~ copies/mL). VL at initial or
confirmatory time points was not significantly associated with
resistance or treatment arm.

Among 256 participants who failed ART, median CD4 count at failure was
241 cells/µL (IQR, 167--359 cells/µL), and median change from
pretreatment CD4 cell count was 98 cells/µL (IQR, 24--181 cells/µL).
Among 232 participants without resistance who failed ART, these values
were 242 cells/µL (IQR, 171--368 cells/µL) and 102 cells/µL (IQR,
26--189 cells/µL), respectively. Among 24 participants with resistance,
these values were 211 cells/µL (IQR, 145--248 cells/µL) and 69 cells/µL
(IQR, 13--121 cells/µL), respectively. The distribution of changes in
CD4 cell count from pretreatment to virologic failure was not
significantly associated with resistance ( *P* = .08).

In a univariable weighted Cox proportional hazards model, baseline
resistance was significantly associated with virologic failure and
shorter time to virologic failure (HR, 2.03 \[95% CI, 1.05--3.92; *P* =
.035\]). After adjusting for sex, treatment arm, sex--treatment arm
interaction, pretreatment CD4 cell count, baseline VL, and subtype,
significance remained (HR, 2.1 \[95% CI, 1.0--4.6\]; *P* = .05). In the
same multivariable model, subtype was independently associated with
virologic failure ( *P* = .001). Compared to subtype B, non--subtype
C/non--subtype B infection was protective against failure (HR, 0.39
\[95% CI, .19--.81\]), whereas there was a nonsignificant trend toward
an association between subtype C infection and increased risk of failure
(HR, 1.4 \[95% CI, .98--2.1\]).

In a multivariable model, additionally adjusting for CD4 cell count
change and self-report of nonadherence within the first 12 weeks,
baseline resistance remained significantly associated with virologic
failure and time to failure (HR, 2.26 \[95% CI, 1.03--4.95\]). Subtype
was again independently associated with virologic failure and time to
virologic failure: subtype C infection was associated with shorter time
to failure (HR, 1.57 vs subtype B \[95% CI, 1.04--2.35\]), and infection
with other subtypes (non-B, non-C) was associated with longer time to
failure (HR, 0.47 vs subtype B \[95% CI, .22--.98\]). There was no
statistically significant evidence that the treatment effect for VL that
was originally observed in the study \[ 15 \]) was modified by baseline
resistance ( *P* = .4 for interaction).

## DISCUSSION

This report presents results of preplanned analyses of baseline HIV drug
resistance in a randomized controlled clinical trial. Baseline
resistance was relatively uncommon (4.2%) but was significantly
associated with virologic failure and time to virologic failure. The
strict enrollment criteria, study oversight, and monitoring of the
PEARLS trial strengthen the conclusions of the study. Inclusion of
participants with equal sex distribution from geographically,
ethnically, racially, and economically diverse regions strengthens the
relevance of the findings to the global HIV epidemic.

The observed associations between resistance and ART failure in the
report are consistent with previous findings from both resource-limited
and resource-rich settings \[ 7 , 13 , 22 , 23 \], including a report by
Hamers et al that analyzed baseline resistance in sub-Saharan Africa \[
13 \]. That study and ours both reached similar conclusions, but some
differences between the studies should be noted. First, PEARLS was a
randomized, controlled trial, whereas the prior study was based on
analysis of a prospective cohort. Second, PEARLS was conducted on 4
continents; the prior study was conducted in Africa only. Third, we used
the WHO mutation list designed specifically for transmitted resistance
surveillance in multiple subtypes \[ 18 \], whereas the prior study used
the International AIDS Society--USA \[ 24 \] and Stanford \[ 25 \]
mutation lists. Fourth, PEARLS had stringent eligibility criteria
regarding previous ART exposure, which reduced the likelihood for
confounding by prior exposure. Finally, the longitudinal design of the
PEARLS trial, in which participants were monitored for virologic failure
in real time at 8-week intervals, allowed identification of the
association between baseline resistance and time to virologic failure,
which was not feasible in the prior study. Our findings thus
significantly expand and strengthen previously observed associations
between baseline resistance and ART outcomes in resource-limited
settings.

Interestingly, we did not observe a significant association between the
prevalence of baseline resistance and either HIV-1 subtype or country.
However, we did find that those infected with subtype C were more likely
to fail ART, and to fail earlier than those infected with subtype B.
Although HIV-1 subtype is not currently part of clinical care
considerations, some reports suggest that it might be associated with
disease progression and drug resistance development \[ 4 , 6 , 26 \],
whereas others disagree \[ 27 , 28 \]. Similar controversy exists
particularly for subtype C \[ 29 -- 31 \]. We present the first clinical
trial data to support the association of HIV-1 subtype, particularly the
globally predominant subtype C, with viral failure. Subtype C has been
associated with a unique NNRTI mutation, V106M \[ 32 \], increased
occurrence of the NRTI K65R mutation \[ 33 \], and overall higher NRTI
and NNRTI resistance prevalence \[ 34 \]. Differences in the types and
frequency of specific drug resistance mutations have been noted for
other HIV-1 subtypes as well \[ 35 , 36 \]. These differences likely
reflect subtype-based differences in the sequences of HIV protease,
reverse transcriptase, and other viral proteins targeted by ARV drugs.
These differences may impact treatment outcomes and the prevalence of
drug resistance in regions where different subtypes predominate. Ongoing
studies are analyzing resistance at failure in the PEARLS study; other
studies are planned to evaluate the frequency and impact of minority
resistance variants \[ 37 \]. Continued research on subtype-related
differences in treatment failure and drug resistance is warranted,
especially as subtype may be confounded with other factors that were not
controlled in this study. The genetic barrier to resistance varies among
ARV drugs. The impact of specific drug resistance mutations also varies.
Mutations such as K103N and M184V, which confer high-level drug
resistance and resistance to multiple drugs, have more significant
implications for treatment options and outcomes than mutations
associated with low-level resistance and/or resistance to single ARV
drugs.

Pre-ART genotyping is cost-effective in the United States where the
estimated prevalence of transmitted drug resistance is \>1% \[ 8 \], but
is not routine in most resource-limited settings. This primarily
reflects infrastructure and cost constraints, but also the lack of data
documenting utility and cost-effectiveness of pre-ART resistance
testing, particularly in settings with low prevalence of drug-resistant
HIV. The benefit of pre-ART resistance testing is expected to increase
in resource-limited settings as levels of resistance rise with ART
scale-up. It is important to note that this study was conducted in the
context of a clinical trial, with frequent VL monitoring, as well as
other adherence assessments and adherence counseling. It will also be
important to conduct similar analyses of baseline resistance and ART
outcome in nontrial (clinical) settings in resource-limited settings
where key components of HIV care, such as VL and CD4 cell count
monitoring, are not routine \[ 38 \].

One limitation of our study is that some participants may have had prior
exposure to ARV drugs and either did not know this or chose not to
disclose this information at time of enrollment. Thus, it is not
possible to conclude that all cases of baseline resistance were due to
transmitted drug resistance. Failure to disclose ARV drug use has been
documented in other studies, including a trial performed at some of the
same sites as PEARLS \[ 39 -- 41 \]. Another limitation of this study is
that pre-ART resistance may have been underestimated due to mutation
decay and reversion in study participants with long-standing HIV
infection \[ 42 \]. Genotyping was also performed using population
sequencing, which may not detect low-level HIV variants with drug
resistance mutations \[ 43 \]. Additionally, PEARLS baseline samples
were collected between 2005 and 2007, relatively early in the roll-out
of ART, which might have affected the prevalence of pretreatment drug
resistance. Last, because the frequency of baseline resistance was
relatively low in the subcohort, some analyses designed to identify
subpopulations that would be most likely to benefit from pre-ART
genotyping (eg, analyses of the association of baseline resistance with
subtype and geography) were limited due to the small absolute numbers of
persons with the outcome of baseline resistance.

In summary, this report demonstrates a significant negative impact of
baseline resistance on ART outcome in adults with diverse subtypes in
diverse settings. Although baseline resistance prevalence remains low in
many settings, continued surveillance is necessary, especially in
regions with programs or plans for enhanced ART scale-up. With expected
increases in the prevalence of transmitted resistance worldwide, this
study will help inform policy decisions related to the use of resistance
testing in clinical practice in resource-limited settings. The findings
in the report support use of genotyping prior to ART initiation in
resource-limited settings, when feasible.
