## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 . Bayesian tree based on full length sequences obtained by MrBayes program. The tree clades belonging to distinct subtypes are displayed in different colors. The scale bar indicates 1% of nucleotide divergence. The tree was rooted using HIV-1K subtype as the outgroup. Only posterior probability >0.98 are showed along branches. Colored squares and circles highlighted the new CRF60_BC sequences and references of interest, respectively.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 shows the schematic representation of subtype mosaicism of the novel CRF. Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Part A: The mosaic structure of CRF60_BC. Breakpoint locations are based on the HXB2 positions. The illustration was created using the Recombinant HIV-1 Drawing Tool ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/DRAW_CRF/recom_mapper.html ) on the Los Alamos HIV Sequence Database Website. Part B: Bootscan analysis of CRF60_BC. Bootscanning plot is performed with the Simplot program using 400 bp window and step size of 30 bp. Breakpoint locations are based on the HXB2 numbering engine. Recombinants segments are indicated above the plot.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 . Part A: The mosaic structure of CRF60_BC. Breakpoint locations are based on the HXB2 positions. The illustration was created using the Recombinant HIV-1 Drawing Tool ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/DRAW_CRF/recom_mapper.html ) on the Los Alamos HIV Sequence Database Website. Part B: Bootscan analysis of CRF60_BC. Bootscanning plot is performed with the Simplot program using 400 bp window and step size of 30 bp. Breakpoint locations are based on the HXB2 numbering engine. Recombinants segments are indicated above the plot.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 highlights the detailed bootscan analysis.


## Fig. 3

Fig. 3 . Maximum Likelihood analysis of genome segment R4A. One ( ∗ ) along a branch represents significant statistical support for the clade subtending that branch (bootstrap support >75%). The scale bar indicates 1% of nucleotide divergence. New CRF60_BC sequences and references of interest are highlighted with colored squares and circles.


