# A novel mutation, D404N, in the connection subdomain of reverse transcriptase of HIV-1 CRF08_BC subtype confers cross-resistance to NNRTIs


## Abstract

### Objectives

Growing evidence suggests that mutations in the connection domain of the
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) can contribute to viral resistance to
RT inhibitors. This work was designed to determine the effects of a
novel mutation, D404N, in the connection subdomain of RT of HIV-1
CRF08_BC subtype on drug resistance, viral replication capacity (RC) and
RT activity.

### Methods

Mutation D404N, alone or together with the other reported mutations, was
introduced into an HIV-1 CRF08_BC subtype infectious clone by
site-directed mutagenesis. Viral susceptibility to nine RT inhibitors,
viral RC and the DNA polymerase activity of viral RT of the constructed
virus mutants were investigated. A modelling study using the server
SWISS-MODEL was conducted to explore the possible structure-related drug
resistance mechanism of the mutation D404N.

### Results

Single mutations D404N and H221Y conferred low-level resistance to
nevirapine, efavirenz, rilpivirine and zidovudine. Double mutations
Y181C/D404N and Y181C/H221Y significantly reduced susceptibility to
NNRTIs. The most pronounced resistance to NNRTIs was observed with the
triple mutation Y181C/D404N/H221Y. Virus containing D404N as the only
mutation displayed ∼50% RC compared with the WT virus. The modelling
study suggested that the D404N mutation might abolish the hydrogen bonds
between residues 404 and K30 in p51 or K431 in p66, leading to impaired
RT subunit structure and enhanced drug resistance.

### Conclusions

These results indicate that D404N is a novel NNRTI-associated mutation
in the HIV-1 subtype CRF08_BC and provides information valuable for the
monitoring of clinical RTI resistance.



## Materials and methods

### Cells, plasmids and drugs

We obtained 293FT cells from ATCC. TZM-bl cells were obtained from Dr
John C. Kappes, Dr Xiaoyun Wu and Tranzyme Inc. through the NIH AIDS
Reagent Program, Division of AIDS, NIAID, NIH. The WT infectious plasmid
pBRGX was constructed and confirmed from a clinical isolate of CRF08_BC
subtype in our previous study. ^20^ Drugs, including four NNRTIs
(nevirapine, efavirenz, etravirine and rilpivirine) and five NRTIs
(zidovudine, abacavir sulphate, lamivudine, emtricitabine and tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate), were obtained through the NIH AIDS Reagent
Program, Division of AIDS, NIAID, NIH.

### Site-directed mutagenesis and virus production

Eight mutation patterns in RT, including single (D404N, D404E, Y181C and
H221Y), double (Y181C/D404N, Y181C/H221Y and D404N/H221Y) and triple
(Y181C/D404N/H221Y) mutations, were introduced into the pBRGX plasmid by
site-directed mutagenesis as described previously ^21^ using AccuPrime™
Taq DNA Polymerase High Fidelity (Invitrogen). Details of the amino acid
substitutions are listed in Table 1 . The presence of mutations in the
plasmids was confirmed by DNA sequencing. Mutation-specific primers and
primers for amplifying RT during positive clone identification were
designed and are illustrated in Table 2 . Constructed mutants and WT
plasmids were transfected into 293FT cells in six-well plates uisng
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer\'s
instructions. Seventy-two hours after transfection, the viruses were
collected, aliquoted and stored in a −80°C freezer for future use. Viral
titre was determined by measuring p24 with a Vironostika kit
(bioMérieux, France) and determining the TCID ~50~ in TZM-bl cells as
described previously. ^22^ Only those with p24 production \>50 mg/L were
subjected to phenotypic drug resistance assay and analysis of RC and RT
activity.

### Phenotypic drug susceptibility of the virus mutants

The susceptibility of the mutant viruses to NNRTIs (nevirapine,
efavirenz, etravirine and rilpivirine) and NRTIs (zidovudine, abacavir
sulphate, lamivudine, emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate)
was measured in a single-cycle cell-culture-based phenotypic assay as
described previously. ^19\ ,\ 22^ In brief, TZM-bl cells (1 × 10 ^4^
/well) were seeded into a 96-well flat-bottom plate. On the next day,
mutant and WT viruses equal to 200--400 blue focus units (BFUs) in
serially diluted drugs were added to each well of the plate in
triplicate. Wells infected with equal amounts of virus but without drugs
were included as virus controls. The plates were incubated at 37°C in a
5% CO ~2~ incubator for 48 h. After the cells had been fixed and
stained, the number of blue cells was calculated using ImmunoSpot 3.2
software after being imaged with an ELIspot plate reader (Cellular
Technology Limited, C.T.L.). IC ~50~ values were determined using
SigmaPlot 12.0 software (four-parameter logistic analysis).
Susceptibility to drugs was expressed as the fold change in IC ~50~ of
mutant virus compared with the WT reference virus. As in our previous
report, ^22^ drug resistance levels were divided into four groups
according to the fold change in IC ~50~ for the mutant virus relative to
WT, i.e. high-level resistance (\>20-fold), moderate-level resistance
(4- to 20-fold), low-level resistance (2- to 4-fold) and susceptible (0-
to 2-fold).

### Determination of RC of the virus mutants

The RC of the mutant and WT viruses was determined in a modified
single-cycle cell-culture-based assay as described previously.
^8\ ,\ 23\ ,\ 24^ Briefly, TZM-bl cells (1 × 10 ^4^ /well) were seeded
in a 96-well plate. On the next day, serially diluted mutant and WT
viruses were applied to TZM-bl cells in triplicate for each dilution.
The subsequent steps were the same as described above for the phenotypic
assays. RC was determined by normalizing the number of blue cells per
millilitre to the corresponding p24 concentration (mg/L) for each mutant
virus. Final relative RC was expressed as a percentage of the value for
the WT reference virus, calculated as follows: RC of test virus
(%) = (blue cell number/ng p24 ~test\ virus~ /blue cell number/ng p24
~WT\ reference\ virus~ ) × 100.

### RT activity assay

The effect of D404N on RT activity was assessed with an RT assay using a
colorimetric kit (Roche, USA) as described previously with some
modifications. ^21^ Briefly, 750 μL of viral supernatant was
ultracentrifuged at 4°C for 2 h at 100 000 **g** and the viral pellets
were resuspended in 75 μL of lysis buffer. Viral lysate was serially
diluted 4-fold in lysis buffer and the subsequent procedures were
carried out according to the manufacturer\'s instructions. Each sample
was detected in duplicate. Viral RT activity was quantified and
normalized by the input amount of p24.

### Modelling study

The models of HIV-1 CRF08_BC RT (1--560 amino acids) (WT containing D404
and mutant containing N404) were built by homology modelling with HIV-1
RT, nevirapine and RNA/DNA hybrid crystal structure 4PUO ^25^ using the
server SWISS-MODEL ^26^ with default parameters. The model was further
analysed using Discovery Studio 3.1 visualizer (Accelrys), and the
Ramachandran plot was examined to ensure that the structure of the model
was not in the unfavourable regions.

### Statistical analysis

The data were evaluated for statistical significance with an unpaired
Student\'s *t* -test using Prism (version 5.0, GraphPad, Inc.). Values
of *P* \< 0.05 were considered to represent a statistically significant
difference. Results are given as the mean ± SD of triplicate independent
experiments.



## Results

### Low-level resistance induced by single mutations

Figure 1 shows that the mutation D404N conferred low-level resistance to
nevirapine (3.5-fold), efavirenz (2.3-fold) and rilpivirine (2.2-fold)
but did not affect susceptibility to etravirine (1.7-fold). Viruses with
the single mutation H221Y were cross-resistant to nevirapine (2.4-fold),
efavirenz (2.4-fold), etravirine (2.6-fold) and rilpivirine (2.3-fold)
(Figure 1 a--d). Mutants with both D404N and H221Y showed low-level
resistance to zidovudine (2.2- and 2.1-fold) but were still susceptible
to all the other NRTIs, including abacavir sulphate, lamivudine,
emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Figure 1 e).
Additionally, viruses containing the single mutation Y181C displayed
high-level resistance to nevirapine (119.4-fold) and low-level
resistance to etravirine (3.6-fold) and rilpivirine (2.7-fold) (Figure 1
a, c and d). No resistance to efavirenz or NRTIs was observed in the
case of Y181C (Figure 1 b and e). However, D404E did not confer
resistance to all the NNRTIs and NRTIs compared with WT (\<2-fold)
(Figure 1 a--e).

Figure 1.

Phenotypic analysis of the susceptibility of virus variants to RT
inhibitors: (a) nevirapine (NVP), (b) efavirenz (EFV), (c) etravirine
(ETR), (d) rilpivirine (RPV) and (e) NRTIs (ZDV, zidovudine; ABC,
abacavir sulphate; 3TC, lamivudine; FTC, emtricitabine; TDF, tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate). The fold changes in IC ~50~ for virus mutants
compared with WT are shown. TZM-bl cells were infected with virus
variants and treated with serially diluted RT inhibitors. At 48 h
post-infection, the number of blue cells, representing HIV infection,
was calculated. The IC ~50~ was estimated from the standard curve
plotted by the percentage of reduction of blue cell numbers and serial
concentrations of inhibitors. \* *P* \< 0.05; \*\* *P* \< 0.01; \*\*\*
*P* \< 0.001.

### Moderate to strong resistance induced by double mutations

To investigate the interaction between component mutations of double
mutations with respect to drug susceptibility, viruses carrying
D404N/H221Y or Y181C/D404N or Y181C/H221Y were generated and tested for
susceptibility to both NRTIs and NNRTIs. Results showed that the double
mutation D404N/H221Y rendered the virus resistant to all the approved
NNRTIs at a moderate level. Compared with H221Y, the addition of D404N
significantly enhanced viral resistance to efavirenz (6.5-fold),
etravirine (5.7-fold) and rilpivirine (4.3-fold) (Figure 1 b--d). In
addition, D404N in combination with H221Y also increased viral
resistance to nevirapine (8.4-fold) (Figure 1 a), though this increase
was not statistically different from that induced by H221Y alone.
Similarly, compared with D404N, the addition of H221Y significantly
reduced viral susceptibility to nevirapine, efavirenz, etravirine and
rilpivirine (Figure 1 a--d). For the five NRTIs (zidovudine, abacavir
sulphate, lamivudine, emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate),
the virus with D404N/H221Y in RT showed no resistance compared with the
WT reference virus (Figure 1 e).

Interestingly, when D404N or H221Y was introduced in addition to the
primary mutation Y181C, mutant viruses showed a sharp decrease in
susceptibility to nevirapine (583.5-fold for Y181C/D404N and 555.0-fold
for Y181C/H221Y) (Figure 1 a) as well as moderate resistance to
etravirine (10- and 5.6-fold), efavirenz (4.1- and 4.6-fold) and
rilpivirine (3.2- and 4.8-fold) (Figure 1 b--d). Compared with Y181C,
the addition of D404N significantly increased resistance to nevirapine,
efavirenz and etravirine (Figure 1 a--c). Likewise, the addition of
H221Y also significantly enhanced viral resistance to nevirapine,
efavirenz and rilpivirine compared with Y181C alone (Figure 1 a--c). The
combination of D404N or H221Y with Y181C did not influence viral
susceptibility to the NRTIs (Figure 1 e).

### High-level cross-resistance to NNRTIs induced by multiple mutations

We further examined the resistance to reverse transcription inhibitors
of viruses carrying multiple mutations (D404N, H221Y and Y181C). Our
results demonstrated \>2000-fold increase in resistance to nevirapine
when these three mutations co-existed. A moderate level of resistance
was also observed for three other NNRTIs (efavirenz, 9.7-fold;
etravirine, 16.1-fold; rilpivirine, 7.5-fold) (Figure 1 b--d) relative
to the WT reference virus. Of note, compared with Y181C/H221Y, the
addition of D404N significantly reduced viral susceptibility to
etravirine and rilpivirine (Figure 1 c and d). Compared with
Y181C/D404N, H221Y also significantly increased viral resistance to
rilpivirine (Figure 1 d). However, the combination of the three
mutations had no influence on the resistance to NRTIs (Figure 1 e).

### D404N and H221Y impaired viral RC

To investigate the effects of D404N and H221Y on viral RC and the
interaction between them and Y181C, single-cycle cell-culture-based
assays were performed. As shown in Figure 2 , the RC of the virus
containing a single D404N mutation was decreased by ∼50% in comparison
with that of the WT virus. The single H221Y mutant displayed the lowest
RC (30.95%). The combination of D404N and H221Y had a similar impact on
viral RC (48.52% of WT) compared with either mutation alone. The above
results indicate that the presence of D404N, H221Y or D404N/H221Y was
clearly able to impair viral RC. The virus with the single mutation
D404E showed similar RC to WT (Figure 2 ).

Figure 2.

RC of HIV-1 virus variants. TZM-bl cells were infected with virus
variants without drugs. At 48 h post-infection, numbers of blue cells,
representing HIV infection, were calculated and normalized by the amount
of p24. The relative RC of virus variants was determined by the ratio of
the blue cell number normalized by input p24 amount (BFU/p24) of mutant
virus compared with that of WT virus (%). \* *P* \< 0.05; \*\* *P*
\< 0.01.

### Impact of Y181C mutation on viral RC

The RC of the virus with Y181C alone was close to that of the WT virus
(84.26% of WT) (Figure 2 ). The addition of D404N or H221Y to Y181C did
not further suppress the replication of virus compared with Y181C alone.
This indicated that Y181C could completely compensate for the impaired
RC of D404N or H221Y. However, when D404N was added to Y181C/H221Y,
viral RC was significantly impaired compared with Y181C/H221Y, dropping
from 106.17% to 46.86% relative to WT (Figure 2 ). Likewise, the
addition of H221Y to Y181C/D404N also led to a significant decrease in
viral RC in comparison with Y181C/D404N (Figure 2 ). In addition,
viruses with Y181C/D404N/H221Y displayed significantly decreased RC
compared with those having Y181C alone. Thus, both D404N and H221Y are
deleterious mutations for viral replication and their co-existence
results in irreversible RC loss.

### RT activity assay

The effects of these mutations on the polymerase activity of RT were
detected using a colorimetric kit. The template/primer included in the
colorimetric kit was a hybrid of poly(A)/oligo(dT) ~15~ and the included
nucleotides were labelled with digoxigenin and biotin in an optimized
ratio. The signal to be detected was from the synthesized minus-strand
cDNA and the activity determined by this kit was the RNA-dependent DNA
polymerase activity of RT. Results showed that D404N conferred 2.6-fold
and D404E 1.6-fold RT polymerase activity relative to that of WT. No
statistical difference was observed between other mutant viruses and WT
reference virus (Figure 3 ).

Figure 3.

RNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity of RT. The polymerase activity of
virus variants and WT virus was tested by a colorimetric RT assay. Viral
particles in the supernatant were concentrated by ultracentrifugation.
Final RT activity was normalized by the amount of p24. Results are
expressed as mean ± SD of two independent experiments.

### Molecular modelling of RT of HIV-1 CRF08_BC

NNRTI-related resistance is always induced by RT conformational changes
resulting from the emergence of mutations such as Y181C and Y188C. To
test whether structural changes could be induced by the novel mutation
D404N, the HIV-1 CRF08_BC RT model was built by homology modelling with
HIV-1 RT, nevirapine and the RNA/DNA hybrid crystal structure (4PUO)
through the server SWISS-MODEL. As shown in Figure 4 (a), residue D404
is adjacent to K30 in p51 and K431 in the p66 subunit. Since aspartic
acid (D) is a negatively charged amino acid and lysine (K) is a
positively charged amino acid, it is apparent in Figure 4 (b) that the
negatively charged oxygen in the carboxylate radical group (red) in the
side chain of D404 is in close proximity to the positively charged
hydrogen in the amine group (blue) of K30 and K431. Therefore, a
hydrogen bond can form between D404 and K30 or K431. When D404 is
replaced with N404, the negatively charged O ^−^ will be replaced by
neutral NH ~2~ and the hydrogen bonds will be abolished. The residues
within 4 Å (hydrogen bond distance) from residue 404 were highlighted
and mainly restricted to the helix of 400--406.

Figure 4.

D404N RT models. (a) The models are shown as ribbon diagrams. Subunits
of p66 and p51 are coloured cyan and purple, respectively. Residue 404
and its vicinal amino acids on both subunits are highlighted. The atoms
of residue 404 are labelled with balls and those of lysine 30 and 431
with sticks. The DNA/RNA hybrid is shown in tube format, coloured grey.
(b) Subunits of p66 and p51 in WT RT with D404 are coloured cyan and
purple, respectively, and those in mutant RT with N404 are coloured
copper and khaki, respectively. Red, oxygen atom; blue, nitrogen atom;
grey, carbon atom. The figures were produced using DS visualizer
(Accelrys).



## Discussion

The current study characterized a novel NNRTI-related mutation D404N in
RT, which was selected previously by nevirapine during *in vitro* cell
culture. ^19^ D404N not only conferred low-level resistance to
nevirapine, efavirenz, rilpivirine and zidovudine when it was the only
mutation, but also increased resistance to all NNRTIs when it was
combined with H221Y or Y181C. Viruses with D404N or H221Y displayed
impaired RC that could be compensated by Y181C. The combination of
D404N, H221Y and Y181C significantly reduced susceptibility to NNRTIs,
accompanied with a great loss of viral RC.

Here, D404N is described as a novel NNRTI-associated mutation because it
has not been reported to be associated with NNRTI resistance in the
Stanford HIV Drug Resistance Database ( http://hivdb.stanford.edu ) or
by the International AIDS Society in the USA. ^27^ Although D404N has
not been observed in patients infected with HIV-1 subtype CRF08_BC
virus, it has indeed been found in HIV-1 subtype C viruses from the sera
of treatment-failure patients receiving an HAART regimen containing
nevirapine and efavirenz, but not treatment-naive patients. ^1^ In
addition, E404N was also found in one patient infected by HIV-1 subtype
B with reduced susceptibility to delavirdine, efavirenz or nevirapine,
while E404D was detected in four patients with reduced susceptibility to
delavirdine, efavirenz, nevirapine or zidovudine. ^8^ Besides, according
to the HIV Drug Resistance Database of Stanford University (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/RTPosMutSummary.cgi ), the
substitution E404D showed a significantly higher frequency (\>10%) than
E404N (\<2%) in ART-experienced patients. The higher frequency of E404D
compared with E404N in subtype B might be explained by a codon
difference. A single G-to-C transition at the third position of the
codon (E404D, GA G to GA C ) has a much higher chance of occurring than
a two-nucleotide substitution (E404N, G A G to A A C ). For HIV-1
subtypes CRF08_BC and C, however, mutation D404N requires only a single
G-to-A transition (the most common RT error) at the first position of
codon 404 ( G AC to A AC). Since the viral genome of CRF08_BC subtype
contains two short fragments with GAG (residues 17--176) and RT regions
(residues 102--200) of subtype B′ inserted in the backbone of subtype C,
^19^ the connection subdomain sequence of subtype CRF08_BC is close to
that of subtype C. In this regard, the frequency of occurrence of 404N
in subtypes CRF08_BC and C might be expected to be similar to and
greater than, respectively, that in subtype B. D404E did not confer
resistance to all the RT inhibitors, which is similar to what was found
for E404 in WT of HIV subtype B and might explain why this D404E
mutation did not occur in our previous selection cultures.

Previously, the emergence of D404N/H221Y in the Y181C mutant was found
to significantly increase viral resistance to nevirapine. ^19^ To
further confirm whether it was due to the effect of a single D404N or
H221Y mutation or to the synergetic impact of both mutations and whether
it was related to the presence of Y181C, we showed in this report that a
single D404N mutation conferred low-level resistance to nevirapine,
efavirenz and rilpivirine, but not to etravirine. This is similar to
what was found for another mutation, A400T, in the connection domain of
RT. One recent study reported that A400T reduced resistance to
nevirapine 5-fold and efavirenz 2-fold but did not affect etravirine
resistance. ^28^ Additionally, the N348I substitution in the connection
domain was associated with resistance to nevirapine, ^29^ while other
mutations, such as E312Q, Y318F, T369I, T369V, A376S and I393L, showed
low-level resistance to nevirapine but had little or no effect on
efavirenz and etravirine. ^6^ Furthermore, we found marginal resistance
to zidovudine in the virus containing D404N, which was also reported for
other amino acid substitutions, such as E312Q, G335C/D, N348I, A360I/V,
V365I and A376S. ^7^ The functions of single Y181C and H221Y mutations
(Figure 1 ) in drug resistance were also investigated and the results
were consistent with other studies. ^30\ --\ 33^

Next, we performed drug susceptibility assays to further confirm the
influence of double (D404N/H221Y, Y181C/D404N and Y181C/H221Y) and
triple (Y181C/D404N/H221Y) mutations. The addition of D404N to H221Y
enabled the viruses to significantly reduce susceptibility to efavirenz,
etravirine and rilpivirine, which indicated that there was synergism in
resistance to NNRTIs between D404N and H221Y. When D404N or H221Y
coexisted with Y181C in RT of HIV-1 subtype CRF08_BC, viral resistance
to nevirapine was dramatically increased (\>500-fold). Also observed
were a significantly higher level of resistance to etravirine (12.6-fold
for Y181C/D404N; 7.3-fold for Y181C/H221Y) and slightly increased
resistance to efavirenz and rilpivirine. These results indicated that
D404N and H221Y could enhance the resistance of Y181C to nevirapine and
etravirine. Some studies found that the Y181C and H221Y mutations were
significantly correlated with resistance to nevirapine and efavirenz,
with an association *P* value of 7.2E-56. ^32\ ,\ 34^ Therefore, this
pathway warrants further analysis in clinical drug resistance mutation
tests. Of note, the addition of D404N to Y181C/H221Y significantly
increased resistance to etravirine and rilpivirine compared with the
combination Y181C/H221Y. Lower susceptibility to nevirapine and
efavirenz was observed for Y181C/D404N/H221Y compared with Y181C/H221Y,
but the difference was not significant. Highest resistance to all the
NNRTIs was conferred by the accumulation of these three mutations
(Y181C/D404N/H221Y).

After confirming the effect of the D404N mutation on resistance to RT
inhibitors, we also characterized its impact on viral RC using a
single-cycle cell-culture assay in the absence of RT inhibitors. Viral
RC refers to the ability of the virus to adapt and reproduce in a
defined environment. ^35^ It is different from RT activity, which refers
to the whole reverse transcription process from the viral single-strand
RNA genome to double-strand DNA, including RNA- and DNA-dependent DNA
polymerase activity and RNase H activity. ^36^ RC depends on multiple
viral and host factors such as the events involved in the virus life
cycle and selective factors such as drugs. Reverse transcription by
viral RT is an important event during viral replication. Emergence of
mutations in RT during therapy potentially affects viral replication.
Therefore, we compared mutant viral RC with that of WT in the absence of
drugs to confirm whether the mutation has any impact on viral
replication. Our results showed that the single mutation D404N
significantly reduced viral RC relative to that of the WT virus. This is
similar to what was found for some NNRTI-related mutations, such as
V106A, G190E and P236L, which were reported to confer reduced RC,
possibly resulting from impaired RNase H activity. ^37\ ,\ 38^ The RC of
viruses containing mutation Y181C was 84.26% of that of WT, consistent
with the result of another study in which the single mutation Y181C was
also observed to slightly reduce viral RC (∼1.5-fold) in the backbone of
pNL4-3 (infectious clone of subtype B). ^23^ Here, the RC and RT
activity of D404E were similar to those of WT, which indicates that 404E
does not influence viral replication.

Although D404N alone impaired viral RC approximately by half, with the
addition of Y181C to D404N the RC was restored to 82.91%. This suggests
that Y181C is a compensatory mutation to D404N. It was reported that
NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 viruses tend to persist in patients over long
periods of time after interruption of NNRTI therapy and have a higher
possibility of transmission into new hosts than PI-resistant viruses
because the NNRTI-resistant viruses have small to moderate impact on
viral fitness. ^39^ Therefore, although the addition of D404N to Y181C
increased resistance to NNRTIs, it did not affect viral RC, which could
enable the virus to persist or readily transmit to a new host.

Interestingly, although no influence of the combination of Y181C with
H221Y on viral RC was detected, the addition of D404N to Y181C/H221Y
resulted in a significant loss of viral RC. In general, viral fitness
decreases as the number of mutations increases. ^40^ Our results
confirmed that the strong cross-resistance to NNRTIs induced by the
triple mutation Y181C/D404N/H221Y occurred at the price of a severe
impairment in RC. We also found that a single H221Y substitution
significantly reduced the RC to 30.95% of the WT value. However, if
H221Y co-existed with Y181C, viral RC was restored to approximately the
WT level and was 1.3-fold higher than that occurring with the single
Y181C substitution. A similar result was reported by another group. ^41^

Results in this report might be ascribed to conformational changes
induced by D404N. According to our high-resolution crystal structure
(Figure 4 ) of the complexes of HIV-1 RT, nevirapine and RNA/DNA hybrid,
residue 404 locates in the helix αL (residues 394--404) on the interface
^42^ and close to K30 in p51 and K431 in the p66 subunit. The change
from negatively charged D404 to hydrophilic polar N404 might abolish the
hydrogen bonds between D404 and K30 or K431. K30 is in the finger
subdomain of p51, while K431 is in the RNase H subdomain in the p66
subunit. The structure between the connection and the finger subdomain
in p51, as well as the structure between the connection and the RNase H
subdomain in the p66 subunit, might be impaired and result in reduction
of susceptibility to RT inhibitors. This structural change might also
influence the RNase H activity of RT and affect viral RC. In our study,
Y181C also did not produce significant loss of polymerase activity,
which is consistent with the results of other studies. ^43\ ,\ 44^

In summary, we identified and characterized a novel NNRTI-associated
mutation, D404N, in the connection subdomain in the RT of HIV-1 subtype
CRF08_BC. This is important because it is very possible for the mutation
D404N to emerge in subtype CRF08_BC because it has been found in
patients infected with HIV-1 subtype C and the connection subdomains of
these two subtypes are very similar. However, the emergence frequency of
the mutation D404N in patients infected with HIV-1 CRF08_BC subtype
still needs to be demonstrated in more clinical studies; besides
nevirapine and efavirenz, D404N also reduced susceptibility to the
second-generation NNRTI rilpivirine by itself or in the presence of
other mutations, such as Y181C and H221Y. In addition, this mutation
could confer low-level resistance to zidovudine. Thus, the presence of
this mutation alone or in combination with Y181C might potentially lead
to failure of HAART therapy including NNRTI; because Y181C could
compensate for the replication loss of D404N, viruses with these two
mutations might persist in the host for a long time and be transmitted
to a new host. CRF08_BC has become a prevalent subtype in China and
studies of novel drug-resistance mutations in this subtype have become
increasingly important. The results of this study are valuable because
they facilitate the development of novel RT inhibitors and the
prevention of therapy failure.

## Funding

This work was supported in part by grants from the AIDS Trust Fund of
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People\'s Republic of
China.


