# Trends of subtype variation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in Zhejiang Province, China

## Abstract

The epidemic characteristics of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) in Zhejiang Province have not been systematically identified.
This study presented a dynamic analysis of HIV-1 subtype variation in
Zhejiang from 2004 to 2008, based on the surveillance of molecular
epidemiology or drug resistance. CRF01_AE was the major strain (43.5 %)
spreading across the province, second by B/B′ (17.9 %), CRF07_BC
(17.1 %), and CRF08_BC (13.7 %). The strains were mainly transmitted by
heterosexual contact. Novel recombinant strains and vertical
transmission were occasionally reported. Floating population from other
provinces accounted for a significant number of HIV-1 cases in Zhejiang.
These data may provide us rational intervention strategy for further
control of HIV dissemination.




## Materials and methods

### Ethics statement

The study was reviewed and approved by the ethical review committee at
Zhejiang Provincial Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Zhejiang
CDC). All participants participated voluntarily in this study. Written
informed consents were obtained from all involved participants in the
study.

### Participants and specimens

The study was conducted in a cross-sectional and anonymous manner in all
11 cities, based on the surveillance of molecular epidemiology or drug
resistance. A total of 451 HIV-1-positive patient samples were collected
by local CDC staff from 2004 to 2008 (Table 1 ). Data were collected
using an interviewer-administered questionnaire \[ 4 \]. Every
participant was assigned a unique and confidential identifier code for
the questionnaire and specimens. Demographic variables were collected
including age, gender, ethnicity, transmission route, education, birth
place, and current residence, etc. \[ 5 \].

All blood samples originally tested by HIV antibody ELISA (Bio-Mérieux,
France) at the local CDC were confirmed using Western-blot (Genelabs
Diagnostics, Singapore) at Zhejiang CDC. 5 ml of EDTA-treated whole
blood was taken from HIV-1 patient, and all samples were transferred to
Zhejiang CDC in less than 12 h. The blood samples were separated into
plasma and peripheral blood monocular cells (PBMC) and stored at −80 °C
until use according to standard procedures.

### Sequencing HIV-1 gag and pol gene fragments

Viral RNA was extracted from patient plasma (140 μl) using QIAamp Viral
RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, USA). HIV-1 cDNA was obtained through RT-PCR using
the Takara One Step RNA PCR kit (Takara, China) and then subjected to
nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the amplification of *gag*
and *pol* gene fragments, as described previously \[ 6 , 7 \]. The
portion of the *gag* gene p17--p24 region (HXB2, 836--1507 nt) \[ 8 --
10 \] and the *pol* gene fragment (HXB2, 2147--3462 nt) \[ 11 , 12 \]
were selected for PCR amplification and phylogenetic analyses. This
study was based on the different surveillance of molecular epidemiology
and drug resistance. PCR products were purified using Qiagen gel
extraction kit, and sequenced using an automated ABI 377 DNA Sequencer
(Applied Biosystems).

### Phylogenetic analysis of HIV-1 sequences

The resulting *gag* or *pol* gene fragments were aligned with subtype
reference sequences from the Los Alamos HIV database. Multiple
alignments were made automatically using software BioEdit 7.0 with minor
manual adjustments. Phylogenetic analysis of the aligned sequences was
performed using MEGA 6.0 with maximum likelihood model and bootstrap
testing (1000 replicates) \[ 13 \]. Clusters of the sequences with
bootstrap values above 70 % were considered significant for defining a
subtype. The subtype of the sequences was proved by the online tool
COMET HIV-1( http://comet.retrovirology.lu/index.php ). Otherwise, we
utilized online tool RIP 3.0 from LANL HIV database, or software Simplot
3.0 to check and ascertain the scattered or alien sequences for subtype
or novel recombinant forms.


## Results

### Sociodemographic characteristics of HIV-1 patients in Zhejiang

The 451 HIV-1-seropositive individuals were followed up by Zhejiang CDC
during 2004--2008. As shown in Table 1 , the demographic characteristics
of the cases are as follows: male ( *n* = 287, 63.6 %), 30--49 years old
( *n* = 236, 52.3 %), Han ethnicity ( *n* = 393, 87.1 %), men who have
sex with men (MSM, *n* = 47, 16.4 %), and less education (equal to or
lower than middle school level, *n* = 343, 76.1 %). Among the 287 male
patients, those that had heterosexual contact ( *n* = 163, 56.8 %) or
homosexual ( *n* = 47, 16.4 %), or using intravenous drugs ( *n* = 46,
16.0 %) accounted for the majority of the group. According to Table 1 ,
a majority of female cases were infected through heterosexual contact
(119 out of 164, 72.5 %), higher than the male ones.

Although using intravenous drugs was second to heterosexual contact,
causing female infections, only 16 patients were in the drug user
category. Five cases were diagnosed as infection through vertical and
mother-to-child (MTC) transmission.

Geographically, 57.6 % ( *n* = 260) of the HIV-1-positive patients were
local residents from all 11 cities of the province. Except for the seven
unknown cases, the remaining 40.8 % ( *n* = 184) originally came from
the other 23 provinces of China, including Yunnan (7.8 %, 35), Guangxi
(7.3 %, 33), Sichuan (5.6 %, 25), Guizhou (5.3 %, 24), Henan (4.9 %,
22), Chongqing (3.3 %, 15), Anhui (4.2 %, 19), Jiangxi (2.4 %, 11), and
others.

### Distributions of HIV-1 subtypes in Zhejiang

During our molecular epidemiology study, the gag or env gene sequences
were obtained. In drug resistance surveillance, only pol gene was
harvested. Totally, 332 *gag* and 229 *pol* gene fragments were
amplified and sequenced from the 451 individual samples, respectively
(Supplementary files 1 and 2). Sequence analyses indicated that three
HIV-1 subtypes (B/B', C, and G), five circulating recombination forms
(CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC, CRF08_BC, CRF02_AG, and CRF06_CPX), and some novel
recombinant strains were detected. It was reported that the sensitivity
and specificity among various subtyping tools might be different \[ 14
\], all the sequences were checked again by the statistical-based tool
COMET HIV. In consistence with Pineda-Pena's results, we found only one
sequence (2007_ZheJiang_HZ07ZJ191) which was evidence of
CRF01_AE-CRF08_BC recombination, suggesting that the sensitivity and
specificity were high for CRF01_AE subtyping between statistical-based
and phylogenetic-based tools.

CRF01_AE was the major strain, infecting 196 cases (43.5 %), and it was
mainly distributed through heterosexual contact. Then, subtype B/B'
(Thai-B) took second place, accounting for 17.9 %, dominant in blood
transfusion. The CRF07_BC and CRF08_BC strains accounted for 17.1 and
13.7 % infections, respectively, mainly infecting patients through IDU
(Figs. 1 , 2 ). The rest strains (35 cases, 7.8 %) included CRF02_AG (8
cases), CRF06_CPX (2 case), subtype G (2 case), subtype C (10 cases),
and 13 potentially novel recombinant strains (CRF07-CRF08, CRF01-C, and
CRF01-B). With the epidemic progress, the population of CRF01_AE
infection was prone to be expanded (Fig. 3 ).

In other words, the results indicated that the major prevalent strains
from 2004 to 2008 in Zhejiang Province were CRF01_AE, B/B', CRF07_BC,
and CRF08_BC, which comprised 92.2 % of the 451 total cases.

### Dynamics of HIV-1 transmission in Zhejiang during 2004--2008

The study participants were mainly infected through heterosexual contact
( *n* = 282, 62.5 %). Infections caused by intravenous drug use, MSM,
blood transfusion, and MTC transmission accounted for only 62 (13.7 %),
47 (10.4 %), 30 (6.7 %), and 5 (1.1 %) cases, respectively. The
transmission routes of other 25 cases could not be confirmed (Fig. 2 ).
These results were consistent with the observations of our previous
surveys, which indicated that the main transmission route was
heterosexual contact in Zhejiang from 2004 to 2008 \[ 15 \]. In recent
years, with the increase of sexually transmitted cases, the disease
raised awareness among MSM \[ 16 , 17 \]. Only two cases (2/25, 8.0 %)
of MSM were reported for the first time in 2004. By 2008, the numbers of
infection via homosexual individuals had slightly increased (14/116,
12.1 %), suggesting the possibility of expanded prevalence in the MSM
population. Therefore, effective intervention measures should be taken
to control the spread of HIV in this population.

### The phylogenetic inference of HIV sequence

The phylogenetic tree was constructed according to the *gag* gene
sequences in Zhejiang. The tree of CRF01_AE *gag* gene indicated that
there was no obvious regional or time correlation, regardless of the
original residence, sampling time or transmission routes (Fig. 4 ). And
the distributions of CRF01_AE strains intermingled, which could be
associated with the high population mobility in Zhejiang. Similar
results were obtained with phylogenetic analysis of *gag* gene sequences
of other subtypes, and *pol* gene sequences. Based on these
observations, we speculated that imported HIV-1 infection cases played a
significant role in the epidemic in Zhejiang, and more necessary
attention should be paid to provide a rational intervention strategy
against HIV dissemination.


## Discussion

After the first reported HIV-1 case in China in the mid-1980s, various
subtypes and high diversity were reported in Zhejiang gradually. To
date, eight subtypes or CRFs were identified in our study, and these
strains were also reported to be circulating elsewhere \[ 18 -- 24 \].

CRF01_AE in our study was the dominant strain circulating in Zhejiang
accounting for 43.5 % infection, across all transmission routes and with
the trend of expansion. The CRF01_AE, which was originally identified in
Thailand in 1989, appears to in major parts of Asia, particularly
Southeast Asia \[ 25 , 26 \]. In China, CRF01_AE strains were first
identified among persons at risk of sexual transmission and IDUs in the
southwest provinces of Yunnan and Guangxi in the early 1990s \[ 27 -- 29
\].The Subsequent nationwide molecular epidemiological surveys in
1996--2002 indicated that the early spread of CRF01_AE was limited to
the eastern coastal areas and southwest border provinces, predominantly
in heterosexual populations \[ 30 , 31 \]. Phylogenetic analyses in Fig.
4 indicated the CRF01_AE sequences were intermingled, irrespective of
the sampling regions, sampling years and transmission routes, and there
were no close relationships or large sub-clusters with sequences.
Therefore, it might be possible that the initial of CRF01_AE in Zhejiang
could be the result of vastly increased international travel to and from
China, starting in the early 1990s when the Chinese government began
relaxing border restrictions to Chinese citizens for unofficial
international travel. Meanwhile, we noticed that imported HIV infections
outside Zhejiang and floating population comprised a significant
percentage of the epidemic in the province. Local residents of Zhejiang
accounted for approximately 57.6 % individuals, and floating population
contributed to 40.8 % infections from other 23 provinces of China. Most
cases ( *n* = 282, 62.5 %) were infected through heterosexual contact in
Zhejiang. Among them, 96 were diagnosed as residents outside Zhejiang,
such as Yunnan, Guangxi, Guangdong where HIV-1 CRF01_AE has a high
prevalence \[ 32 -- 34 \]. So there is another possibility that the
floating population may function great to the epidemic increase,
bringing strains to or from Zhejiang. However, the rare strains like
CRF02_AG, G and CRF06_CPX mainly appeared in Zhoushan City, the
settlement of native ocean-going fishermen who have traveled abroad for
work.

In this study, we observed 13 novel recombinant strains including
CRF07-CRF08, CRF01-B, and CRF01-C. So many different strains were
co-circulating here, and some strains shuffled among different
population or transmission routes. All these brought an ideal platform
for super-infection and the descendants of novel recombinant strains.

Interestingly, we observed several vertical or transmission events were
reported during these years. The population infected through MSM was
gradually increased from 2004 to 2008 in Zhejiang. Otherwise, we
observed some novel recombinant strains there. The newly expanded
epidemic should be paid more attention and efficient measures should be
taken to control the transmission.

Overall, the recent 5-years HIV-1 epidemic in Zhejiang was summarized in
this study. The results revealed that CRF01_AE became the current major
circulating strain and heterosexual contact was the major transmission
route. High HIV-1 diversity was noted, which could be a factor that
could accelerate this pandemic. The floating population contributed a
great deal to the epidemic; therefore, intervention for this group
should be a new focus of HIV prevention and control strategies. These
data may be significant in further clarifying the AIDS epidemic.

Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of
the HIV-1 patients who participated in this study and also thank the
staff of Zhejiang and the local CDC for recruiting participants, col-
lecting the samples, and technical assistance. The HIV sequences are
accessible in GenBank from KJ613998 to KJ614226 (Pol) and from
KJ613666to KJ613997 (Gag).

Funding This work was supported by the foundation of The Health
Department of Zhejiang Province (2012KYB054) and in part by
NSFC Grant (81101257). The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

Conflict of interests The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.