
# Analysis of HIV-1 BF *pr*/*rt* recombinant strains from Rio de Janeiro/Brazil reveals multiple unrelated mosaic structures

## Abstract

Due to the co-circulation of HIV-1 subtypes B and F1 in Brazil, a large variety of unique BF1 recombinant forms (URFs_BF1) and four circulating BF1 recombinant forms (CRF28, CRF29, CRF39 and CRF40) have been described. The aim of this study was to investigate mosaic structure and phylogenetic relationship among several BF1 (protease--reverse transcriptase, pr/rt) recombinant sequences obtained from a group of patients from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 1994 to 2005. Phylogenetic relationships were estimated by Bayesian and SplitsTree methods. Recombination breakpoints were analyzed by Bootscan. Those samples presenting the same recombinant pattern in the pr/rt region were investigated in the integrase (int) and envelope (env) regions as a screening method for the detection of potential new CRFs candidates. Third out of 61 pr/rt HIV-1 BF1 recombinant sequences analyzed depicted unique recombinant structures and were classified URFs_BF1. The other 31 samples segregated in eight well-supported phylogenetic clusters composed of at least three samples sharing the same recombination pattern. Analyses of the int and env regions from these 31 samples revealed that 11 samples were URFs_BF1. Three and four sequences corresponded, respectively, to the previously described CRF39 and CRF40. Three samples displayed a CRF28-like mosaic structure, and one sample a CRF29-like mosaic pattern. The other nine BF1 samples segregate in three distinct clusters with the same recombination profile and could represent good candidates for new CRFs_BF profiles. The HIV-1 BF1 epidemic in Rio de Janeiro is characterized by a high prevalence (67%) of URFs_BF1 and a low prevalence (4.9--6.6%) of each CRFs_BF previously identified in Brazil.


## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Study population

Sixty-one HIV-1 BF1 recombinant strains were identified after screening
of a total of 1504 *pr*/*rt* sequences recovered from 1994 to 2005 in
HIV-1 seropositive individuals from Rio de Janeiro State. All samples
were classified in the *pr*/*rt* region in previous studies carried
out in our laboratory ( Couto-Fernandez et al., 2005 , Eyer-Silva et
al., 2007a , Eyer-Silva et al., 2007b , Maia Teixeira et al., 2006 ).
The BF1 samples were mostly obtained (82%) from patients under highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) collected from 2002 to 2005. The
remaining ones (18%) were collected from 1994 to 2005. The risk group
was not available for the most patients. Sequences were excluded if they
came from individuals known to be related by a direct transmission or
from the same patient. Blood collection was performed after informed
consent as specified in each of the original studies ( Couto-Fernandez
et al., 2005 , Eyer-Silva et al., 2007a , Eyer-Silva et al., 2007b ,
Maia Teixeira et al., 2006 ). The re-analyses of the *pr*/*rt*
sequences and DNA sequencing of the *int* and *env* regions from the BF1
selected samples followed the Brazilian legislation for Ethics in
Research with Human Beings.

### 2.2. HIV-1 pr/rt sequences

Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood of drug naïve patients using
a DNA extraction column kit (QIAamp DNA Mini Blood Kit; QIAGEN,
Valencia, CA) and sequencing using a home brew protocol method as
described elsewhere ( Eyer-Silva et al., 2007a , Eyer-Silva et al.,
2007b , Maia Teixeira et al., 2006 ). HIV-1 plasma RNA genotyping of
*pr* / *rt* region of patients under highly active antiretroviral
therapy were obtained using the ViroSeq HIV-1 Genotyping System protocol
(Celera Diagnostic, Abbott Laboratories, Des Plaines, IL) (
Couto-Fernandez et al., 2005 ). Phylogenetic trees of *pr* / *rt*
sequences from patients under HAART were previously constructed by the
maximum likelihood method with PAUP, version 4.0b10 ( Swofford, 2003 ).
For the other patients phylogenetic inferences were performed by
Neighbor-Joining (NJ) algorithm as previously described ( Eyer-Silva et
al., 2007a , Eyer-Silva et al., 2007b , Maia Teixeira et al., 2006 ).
Inferences of recombination breakpoints were performed by bootscan
analysis ( Salminen et al., 1995 ), using the SimPlot software.

### 2.3. HIV-1 integrase and envelope sequences

In order to better analyze the complexity of the BF1 recombinant
patterns circulating in Rio de Janeiro, the samples belonging to the
clusters detected in the *pr* / *rt* region were selected for further
investigation based on the *env-gp120* ( *env-1* ), *int* and *env*
-gp41 ( *env-2* ) as they are considered as highly recombinogenic
regions ( Magiorkinis et al., 2003 , Thomson and Najera, 2005 ).
Amplification of these regions was performed as described elsewhere (
Passaes et al., 2009 ) ~.~ All PCR products were purified using Illustra
GFX PCR DNA purification kit (GE Healthcare, Amersham, Buckinghamshire,
UK) according to the manufacturer\'s protocol. Purified DNA was
sequenced by using the ABI BigDye Terminator version 3.1 cycle
sequencing ready reaction kit (Applied Biosystem, CA, U.S.A.) and
processed with an automated ABI 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied
Biosystem, CA, U.S.A.).

### 2.4. Sequence alignments

Nucleotide sequences of the studied strains were aligned with subtypes
B, F1 and CRFs_BF1 previously described using the Clustal X program (
Thompson et al., 1997 ) and later manually edited for minor adjustments.
All positions with alignment gaps were removed. Four distinct alignments
were used in the present study: the *pr* / *rt* alignment covered a
fragment of 1231 nt (2277--3507 positions relative to HXB2 strain), the
second alignment of around 864 nt covered the complete *int*
(nucleotides 4230--5093 relative to HXB2); the third alignment of 404 nt
spans the *env-1* region (nucleotides 6876--7282 relative to HXB2), and
the fourth alignment of 593 nt spans the *env-2* region (nucleotides
7620--8209 relative to HXB2). All alignments are available from the
authors upon request.

### 2.5. Sequence analysis

The phylogenetic relationship within the BF1 studied samples and between
them and the CRFs_BF1 described were assessed by Bayesian method and
confirmed SplitsTree analysis. The jModeltest 0.1.1 program was used to
select the best-fit model of nucleotide substitution under the Akaike
information criteria, resulting in the choice of the GTR+ I + G model (
Tavaré, 1986 ) as implemented in MrBayes version 3.1.2 ( Ronquist and
Huelsenbeck, 2003 ). For each data set, two runs of 4 chains each (one
cold and three heated, temp = 0.20) were run for 1 × 10 ^7^ generations,
with a burn-in of 1 × 10 ^6^ generations. Convergence of parameters was
assessed by calculating the effective sample size (ESS) using TRACER
version 1.4 ( http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/Tracer/
) excluding an initial 10% for each run. All parameter estimates for
each run showed an ESS values \>100. A final Bayesian majority-rule
consensus tree was obtained for each data set.

The SplitsTree program version 4 ( Huson and Bryant, 2006 ) was employed
to confirm the phylogenetic relationship of BF1 Brazilian samples in the
*pr* / *rt* region and the method used was NeighborNet based on the
pairwise distance estimated by F84 parameter model.

Bootscan analysis ( Salminen et al., 1995 ) was used to detect
recombination as implemented in the SimPlot software version 3.5.1 (
http://www.med.jhu.edu/deptmed/sray/download/
) .The analyses were performed on a sliding window of 200 nt moving in
steps of 20 nt using the K2-parameter model, with representative HIV-1
strains representatives of group M subtypes. To better characterize the
recombination breakpoints suggested in the previous analyses, the
putative recombinants were subjected to informative site analyses (
Sierra et al., 2005 ) and were finally confirmed by separate
Neighbor-Joining trees constructed using the K2-parameter model in the
MEGA 4.0 program ( Tamura et al., 2007 ).

### 2.6. Sequence data

GenBank accession numbers: HM439694--HM439716 ( *env-2* ),
HM439716--HM439738 ( *env-1* ), HM439739--HM439762 ( *int* ).

::: section

## 3. Results

From a total number of 1504 HIV-1 *pr/rt* nucleotide sequences obtained
from 1994 to 2005, in Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil, 61 (4.1%) presented
a BF1 recombinant pattern. In order to better characterize the mosaic
structure and the relationships among these BF1 *pr* / *rt* recombinant
samples and those CRF_BF already described a combination of Bayesian,
SplitsTree, bootscan and informative site analysis was carried out.
According to these analyses, a complex diversity of BF1 recombination
patterns was verified and a total of 30 samples displaying a unique
recombination profile were classified as URFs_BF. The remaining 31
sequences segregates in eight well-supported clusters composed of at
least three samples sharing the same recombination patterns ( Fig. 1 ).
The criteria used for the definition of these clusters were: (a)
clusters with posterior probability values higher than 9 in the Bayesian
analysis, (b) clusters converging to the same summit in the SplitsTree
and (c) same mosaic pattern in the bootscan analysis.

Samples from cluster 1 formed a monophyletic group with the CRF28_BF and
CRF29_BF, as both CRFs present the same recombination pattern in this
genomic region ( Fig. 1 ). Samples from clusters 4 and 7 correspond,
respectively, to the newly described CRF39_BF and CRF40_BF and were
fully characterized elsewhere ( Guimarães et al., 2008 ). Samples from
cluster 3, segregate in a branch related to the CRF39 and possess the
same recombination pattern of this CRF except for the inclusion of one F
fragment in the beginning of the analyzed region (2277--2474, relative
to HXB2) ( Fig. 1 ), suggesting that these sequences could share a
common BF1 recombinant ancestor with the CRF39_BF. The other four
clusters displayed distinct BF1 patterns, as could be visualized in the
bootscan analysis in the Fig. 1 . None of the studied samples grouped
with the CRFs_BF described in other South American countries (CRF12,
CRF17, and CRF38) (data not shown).

In order to better analyze the complexity and the phylogenetic
relationships among BF1 recombinant forms circulating in Rio de Janeiro,
those 24 HIV-1 samples belonging to *pr* / *rt* clusters 1--3, 5, 6 and
8 were selected for additional analysis of the *int* ( Fig. 2 ) and the
*env* regions ( Fig. 3 ). Samples of cluster 1 exhibited diverse genomic
structures in the *int* region: three samples (02BRRJ026, 03BRRJ023, and
05BRRJ422) were subtype B, one sample (01BRRJUD595) was subtype F1, and
five samples (02BRRJ034, 03BRRJFT11, 05BRRJ164, 05BRRJ367, and
03BRRJFT29) were classified as BF1 recombinants, with three different
recombination patterns ( Fig. 2 ). All samples from cluster 1 were
classified as subtype B in the *env-1* and *env-2* regions (except for
05BRRJ422 that did not amplify) ( Fig. 3 ). Samples from cluster 2
displayed the same BF1 recombination pattern in the *int* region ( Fig.
2 ) and were classified as subtype B in the *env-1* and *env-2* regions
( Fig. 3 ). Samples from cluster 3 were classified as subtype B in the
*int* region ( Fig. 2 ) but present divergent subtype assignments in the
*env-1* and *env-2* regions ( Fig. 3 ) as follows: sample 04BRRJ302 was
classified as subtype B in both regions; sample 02BRRJ046 was classified
as subtype F1 and BF1 in the *env-1* and *env-2* regions, respectively;
whereas sample 03BRRJ333 did not amplify in *env-1* and was subtyped as
F1 in *env-2* . Samples from cluster 5 were classified as BF1
recombinants in the *int* region with two samples (03BRRJ268 and
03BRRJ358) displaying the same recombination profile and the other one
(04BRRJ025) displaying a shorter subtype B fragment ( Fig. 2 ). Samples
from this cluster also displayed divergent subtype assignments in the
*env-1* and *env-2* regions ( Fig. 3 ): sample 03BRRJ268 was classified
as subtype F1 in both regions; sample 03BRRJ358 was classified as
subtype F1 and BF1 in the *env-1* and *env-2* regions, respectively;
whereas sample 04BRRJ025 was classified as BF1 and B in the *env-1* and
*env-2* regions, respectively. Sequences from cluster 6 were classified
as subtype B in the *int* region, and as subtype F1 in the *env-1*
(except for 04BRRJ178 that was not amplified) and *env-2* regions.
Samples from cluster 8 were classified as subtype F1 in *int* and *env*
regions analyzed ( Fig. 2 , Fig. 3 ). Fig. 4 summarizes the
recombination pattern of clusters 1--3, 5, 6 and 8 at the four genomic
regions analyzed. As we mentioned above, full-length genome
characterization of clusters 4 and 7 was presented elsewhere ( Guimarães
et al., 2008 ).

::: section

## 4. Discussion

After an extensive screening of 1504 HIV-1 samples from Rio de Janeiro
State, Southeastern Brazil, we were able to identify 61 (4.1%) samples
as BF1 recombinants in the *pr* / *rt* region. Similar proportions of
BF1 recombinants were detected in independent studies conducted in Rio
de Janeiro (4%) ( Sá-Ferreira et al., 2007 ), São Paulo (4.1%) (
Gonsalez et al., 2007 ), Federal District (Central Brazil) (3.1%) (
Veras et al., 2007 ) and Northeast region (4%) ( Cavalcanti et al., 2007
). Other studies had documented higher proportion of BF1 recombinants in
Minas Gerais (6%) ( Waleria-Aleixo et al., 2008 ), São Paulo (7.3--8.4%)
( Barreto et al., 2006 , Sa Filho et al., 2005 ), Santos (28.9%) ( de
Sa-Filho et al., 2008 ) and Goiania (7.2--15%) ( Cardoso et al., 2009 ,
Cardoso and Stefani, 2009 ) showing that the frequency of recombinants
vary across different country regions. Higher proportions (∼15%) of BF1
recombinants have been also observed in intravenous drug user samples
collected in Rio de Janeiro from 1994 to 2001 ( Maia Teixeira et al.,
2006 ), indicating that the frequency of these recombinants could differ
according to the HIV transmission route.

According to the genetic analysis of the 61 BF1 samples from Rio de
Janeiro, 41 sequences corresponded to URFs_BF (67%) and 20 could be
divided according to the recombination patterns as CRFs_BFs or potential
candidates to CRFs_BF (33%). From those, three samples (4.9%) displayed
a CRF28_BF-like mosaic pattern and one sample (1.7%) a CRF29_BF-like
mosaic pattern in the analyzed regions. Three (4.9%) and four (6.6%)
samples were classified as CRF39_BF and CRF40_BF, respectively (
Guimarães et al., 2008 ). Finally, nine samples segregate in three
distinct phylogenetic groups (clusters 2, 5 and 6). Each cluster
contains three sequences with the same mosaic structures in the four
genomic regions analyzed and could represent new CRFs. It is important
to highlight that, if these three potential new CRFs do not finally
share the same structure when entirely sequenced, the URF_BF prevalence
would increase from 67% to 82% among BF1 recombinant samples.

The lower epidemiological relevance of each CRF_BF in Rio de Janeiro
contrasts with the epidemiological profile in two other cities from the
Southeastern region of Brazil, Santos ( de Sa-Filho et al., 2008 ) and
São Paulo ( de Souza et al., 2008 ), where the CRF28_BF and CRF29_BF
*pol* structures were found to represent 83% and 30% of the BF1
recombinant samples, respectively. The extremely high prevalence of
those CRFs_BF in Santos might be a consequence of the importance of
intravenous drug users in the local epidemic, which contrasts with the
epidemiological profile of HIV infection in Rio de Janeiro city where
sexual transmission is the predominant route. CRFs_BF also plays an
important role in the local epidemics of other South American countries
like as CRF12_BF in Argentina ( Quarleri et al., 2004 ) and the CRF12_BF
and CRF38_BF in Uruguay ( Ruchansky et al., 2009 ). A report concerning
samples from Chile revealed that BF1 recombinants in *pol* represent 15%
and most of them grouped into two clusters, one related to the CRF12_BF
and the other possibly representing a new CRF ( Rios et al., 2007 ).

Even including those nine possible CRFs_BF candidates (samples from
clusters 2,5, and 6) as URFs_BF, this group would account for only 3.3%
of the analyzed samples, similar to those verified in São Paulo (3%) and
Santos (4.8%) ( de Souza et al., 2008 , de Sa-Filho et al., 2008 ).
Taken together, the low prevalence of both URFs_BF and CRFs_BF in Rio de
Janeiro has a direct correlation to the lower subtype F1 (5%)
circulation, leading to a minor probability of inter-subtype
recombination events. This findings contrasts with Argentinian molecular
epidemiology, where 56.9% samples from newly diagnosed individuals
(2003--2005) where BF1 recombinants (22.7% of URFs_BF, 15.55% of
CRF12_BF and 15.55% CRF12_BF related) ( Dilernia et al., 2007 ). In
Argentina subtype F is rare, being mostly present in their recombinant
form BF1. Thus, we suggest that the high prevalence of both CRFs_BF and
URFs_BF in these geographic regions might results from founder events,
such as from a CRF12_BF or an ancestor related form.

In summary, our study reveals that most of the BF1 recombinants result
of independent recombination events between subtypes B and F1 and that
these URFs_BF are an important component of the HIV-1 epidemic in Rio de
Janeiro State, Brazil. The prevalence of each CRFs_BF individually seems
to be very low in this state, which contrast with the epidemiological
profile of some neighboring cities like Santos ( de Sa-Filho et al.,
2008 ) and São Paulo ( de Souza et al., 2008 ). These results support
the notion that the HIV-1 epidemic in Brazil is heterogeneous and varies
not only across distinct country regions but also among cities within
the same geographic region.

