## Fig 1

FIG 1 The progress of viral breakthrough from low to high concentrations of compounds. Compound concentrations escalate from column 11 (lowest) to column 1 (highest). Panels: A, EFV; B, RPV; C, DOR. Gray suggests that there is no viral breakthrough. Black indicates that there may be a minor portion of breakthrough viruses but the green fluorescence is too weak to be detected. Dark green indicates a high level of viral breakthrough. Light green indicates a medium level of viral breakthrough or high level of viral breakthrough causing some extent of cell death.


## Fig 2

FIG 2 Relative prevalence of WT and V106A mutant viruses in cultures from the replication capacity study. Solid diamonds represent the V106A mutant virus, and solid squares represent the WT virus. The experiment was conducted in triplicate, and the error bars represent standard deviations.


## Fig 3

FIG 3 Susceptibilities of selected mutant viruses to NNRTIs. (A) Mutants selected by DOR. (B) Mutants selected by EFV. (C) Mutants selected by RPV. The x axis shows the sequential appearance of mutant viruses selected by the NNRTIs.


## Fig 4

FIG 4 X-ray structure of the RT-DOR complex. Residues that are selected by DOR during resistance selection are shown. A red dashed line indicates the formation of a hydrogen bond between DOR and residue K103. Highlighted in yellow is V106, which is the major residue involved in the development of resistance to DOR.


## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 . Breakthrough viruses were harvested and subjected to population sequence analyses after green fluorescence was observed on the entire plate, as shown in Fig. 1 at day 81. Mutation data were collected from two independent experiments with a total of 16 repeats (two plates, eight rows each).


## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 . Breakthrough viruses were harvested and subjected to population sequence analyses after green fluorescence was observed on the entire plate, as shown in Fig. 1 at day 81. Mutation data were collected from two independent experiments with a total of 16 repeats (two plates, eight rows each).


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , the percentage of V106A mutant versus WT virus continued to decrease as the passage number increased. With this trend, the V106A mutant will eventually be replaced by the WT virus. The replication capacity of the V106A virus was calculated according to the equation 1 + s = 1 + ln[( M t / M 0 )/( R t / R 0 )] [1] ( 22 ).


**Fig. 3 not found**

## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 . As a result, the impact of the K103N substitution on the interactions between the residue and DOR is minimal, as the interactions between N103 and the DOR triazole ring remain intact. Y181 does not play an important role in the binding of DOR to RT, given the long distance between the cyanochlorophenol group of DOR and Y181 based on the X-ray structure. Therefore, it is not surprising that the Y181C mutation does not confer high resistance to DOR, with an FC of <2, likely explaining the lack of selection of this mutant in resistance selection experiments. In contrast, the cyanochlorophenol moiety forms π-π stacking with Y188, and the Y188L substitution eliminates the π-π interactions and creates a clash with DOR; thus, the Y188L substitution confers significant resistance to DOR, suggesting that the π-π interactions between the residues are crucial for the binding of DOR to RT.


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 . It appears that the isopropyl group on the Val side chain makes van der Waals interactions with DOR in the NNRTI binding pocket. Replacement of the isopropyl group with a methyl group (V106A) weakens the interactions between RT and DOR, rendering 10-fold resistance of the virus to DOR. Interestingly, substitutions at position V106 were often found to be associated with substitution at F227 as the concentration of DOR increased in the resistance selection with subtypes A, B, and C. Although the F227 residue has a limited interactions with the triazole ring of DOR, it is in close proximity to V106, at a distance of 3.5 Å based on the X-ray structure. Therefore, residue substitution at position 227 may, in turn, alter the interactions between the residue at 227 and V106A, causing conformation changes of the latter, which may further reduce the interactions between the V106A mutant and DOR, causing significant resistance to DOR.


**Figure 3 not found**

