# Generation of a Recombinant Gag Virus-Like-Particle Panel for the Evaluation of p24 Antigen Detection by Diagnostic HIV Tests

Beatrice N. Vetter , ^1\ ,^ ^\*^ Vanessa Orlowski , ^1^ Katrien Fransen
, ^2^ Christoph Niederhauser , ^3^ Vincent Aubert , ^4^ Marcel
Brandenberger , ^5^ Diana Ciardo , ^6^ Günter Dollenmaier , ^7^ Thomas
Klimkait , ^8^ Stephan Regenass , ^9^ Patrick Schmid , ^10^ Volkmar
Schottstedt , ^11^ Franziska Suter-Riniker , ^12^ Sabine Yerly , ^13^
Cyril Shah , ^1^ Jürg Böni , ^1^ and Jörg Schüpbach ^1^

Jean-Luc E. P. H. Darlix, Editor

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer


## Associated Data

Supplementary Materials

:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

Data Availability Statement

:



## Abstract

### Background

Detection of HIV-1 p24 antigen permits early identification of primary
HIV infection and timely intervention to limit further spread of the
infection. Principally, HIV screening should equally detect all viral
variants, but reagents for a standardised test evaluation are limited.
Therefore, we aimed to create an inexhaustible panel of diverse HIV-1
p24 antigens.

### Methods

We generated a panel of 43 recombinantly expressed virus-like particles
(VLPs), containing the structural Gag proteins of HIV-1 subtypes A-H and
circulating recombinant forms (CRF) CRF01_AE, CRF02_AG, CRF12_BF,
CRF20_BG and group O. Eleven 4 ^th^ generation antigen/antibody tests
and five antigen-only tests were evaluated for their ability to detect
VLPs diluted in human plasma to p24 concentrations equivalent to 50, 10
and 2 IU/ml of the WHO p24 standard. Three tests were also evaluated for
their ability to detect p24 after heat-denaturation for immune-complex
disruption, a pre-requisite for ultrasensitive p24 detection.

### Results

Our VLP panel exhibited an average intra-clade p24 diversity of 6.7%.
Among the 4 ^th^ generation tests, the Abbott Architect and Siemens
Enzygnost Integral 4 had the highest sensitivity of 97.7% and 93%,
respectively. Alere Determine Combo and BioRad Access were least
sensitive with 10.1% and 40.3%, respectively. Antigen-only tests were
slightly more sensitive than combination tests. Almost all tests
detected the WHO HIV-1 p24 standard at a concentration of 2 IU/ml, but
their ability to detect this input for different subtypes varied
greatly. Heat-treatment lowered overall detectability of HIV-1 p24 in
two of the three tests, but only few VLPs had a more than 3-fold loss in
p24 detection.

### Conclusions

The HIV-1 Gag subtype panel has a broad diversity and proved useful for
a standardised evaluation of the detection limit and breadth of subtype
detection of p24 antigen-detecting tests. Several tests exhibited
problems, particularly with non-B subtypes.



## Introduction

Early diagnosis of HIV infection by timely HIV screening is one of the
cornerstones of prevention of secondary transmission and an opportunity
to initiate potentially beneficial, early antiretroviral treatment \[1\]
, \[2\] . Early diagnosis is important, as a large proportion of
transmissions occur in the early phase of infection, due to the high
viral load at this stage and an individual\'s unawareness of the
infection \[3\] -- \[5\] . The first viral markers detectable in patient
plasma are viral RNA and p24 protein at a median of 9 and 16 days post
infection, respectively \[6\] , \[7\] . Antibodies to viral components
are on average only detectable from 22 days post infection onwards \[8\]
. The most economical way to diagnose early infection is by p24 antigen;
screening tests that detect both antibodies and p24 antigen, so called 4
^th^ generation or combination screening tests, were introduced into
routine testing more than 15 years ago in Europe \[9\] and, more
recently, also in the USA \[10\] . These tests have led to an increase
in the identification of early HIV infections, attributed to the
detection of p24 \[9\] , \[11\] , \[12\] .

The high genetic diversity of HIV is a major challenge for any
diagnostic test. HIV-1 consists of four phylogenetically different
groups, M (major), O (outlier), N (non-M-non-O) and P. Group M viruses
have been further divided into 9 different subtypes (A, B, C, D, F, G,
H, J, K) and to date 55 circulating recombinant forms (CRFs) \[13\] ,
some of which contribute substantially to the pandemic (such as CRF01_AE
and CRF02_AG). The overwhelming majority of all HIV-1 infected
individuals harbour viruses belonging to group M, but the global
distribution of group M subtypes varies strongly \[14\] . The most
prevalent subtype C largely circulates in sub-Saharan Africa and India,
subtype A mostly circulates in Eastern Europe and Central Asia and
subtype B mostly in Europe, the Americas and Oceania. The recombinant
forms CRF01_AE and CRF02_AG are frequently found in Southeast Asia and
West Africa, respectively. However, due to global mobility clades are
not strictly confined to specific regions of the world.

Unlike for HIV nucleic acid tests, where a standardised and centrally
distributed subtype reference panel was introduced several years ago
\[15\] , standardized reagents for assessing the quality of HIV-1
antigen detection in diagnostic tests are scarce. The only available
reference reagent is a World Health Organization (WHO) standard, which
consists of a single p24 antigen preparation from detergent-treated
HIV-1, probably of subtype B \[16\] . Currently, subtype-sensitivity for
antigen is established using seroconversion panels or culture-produced
viruses. Seroconversion panels are expensive, in quantity limited, with
unknown concentration of p24 antigen and limited subtype diversity.
Culture-produced virus requires level-3 biosafety facilities for
production, and standardisation based on HIV-1 RNA quantification may be
impaired by subtype diversity \[17\] .

In a novel approach to create a standardised, diverse and easy to
produce panel of reagents, we have generated recombinantly expressed
virus-like-particles (VLPs), expressing the Gag proteins from various
subtypes in a subtype B backbone. These VLPs are non-infectious,
produced by transfection under low-level biosafety conditions and easily
standardised based on their content of a uniform, backbone-derived
reverse transcriptase. Therefore, they represent an inexhaustible source
for a standardised evaluation of p24 antigen tests, which covers the
entire breadth of HIV-1 diversity. Here we used this panel to evaluate
commercial diagnostic HIV tests.



## Materials and Methods

### Ethics statement

All HIV-1 RNA samples used in this study were obtained from residual
material after routine genetic resistance testing. No informed consent
was obtained, because the study used only the viral sequences but no
patient information.

### Viruses and cloning procedure

Viral RNA isolates used for *gag* cloning were chosen based on the HIV-1
subtype determined by sequencing the *protease-reverse transcriptase
(pr-rt)* region of *pol* for drug resistance testing. All primers used
in the cloning procedure are listed in table S1 in file S1 . Due to the
overlapping *gag-protease (gag-pr)* reading frame in the viral genome,
the entire *gag-pr* part of the viral genome was cloned into the second
generation lentiviral vector pCMVΔ8.91 \[18\] by replacing the excised
*gag-pr* with the isolate-derived *gag-pr* part via unique restriction
sites. To this end a unique MluI restriction site was introduced in the
vector at the 5′ end (position 844--849) immediately upstream of the
start of the *gag* -coding region, and a PvuI restriction site was
introduced as a silent mutation at the 3′ end (position 2625--2630) of
the *pr* -coding region. A pre-existing PvuI restriction site in the
*amp* -coding region of the plasmid (position 8466--8471) was deleted by
silent mutation. All mutations were performed using the XL-site-directed
mutagenesis kit (200521) from Stratagene. cDNA synthesis from isolate
RNA was performed at 42°C for 60 min followed by 2 min at 96°C, using
the PrimeScript One-Step RT-PCR ver. 2 (RR055B) from TaKaRa. The
*gag-pr* part of the viral genome was either amplified directly from
cDNA or via nested PCR after an intermediate first-round PCR step. For
direct *gag-pr* amplification or intermediate first-round PCR, 250 nM of
forward and reverse primers were added directly to the synthesised cDNA,
and PCR was performed according to cycling parameters in table S2 in
file S1 . One µl of the first round PCR product was used in a subsequent
nested *gag-pr* amplification PCR, using Phire Hot Start DNA Polymerase
(Life Technologies). *Gag-pr* PCR products and the modified backbone
pCMVΔ8.91 were purified, digested and ligated according to standard
molecular biology procedures. Ligated plasmids were transformed into
z-competent (T3001, Zymogen) DH5alpha E.coli bacteria. Mutagenesis and
insertion of *gag-pr* into the vector were verified by sequencing. The
recombinant g *ag-pr* nucleotide sequences were submitted to the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank database
and assigned accession numbers are listed in table S3 in file S1 .

### VLP production, purification and quantification

For the production of VLPs, 40 µg plasmid were transfected over night
into 293T-cells, plated at 2×10 ^6^ cells/75 cm ^2^ flask, using
polyethylenimine transfection reagent at twice the amount of transfected
DNA. Supernatants were collected 24 h and 48 h after medium change and
stored at 4°C. For VLP purification, pooled supernatants were filtered
(0.2 µm), and pelleted through a 32% sucrose cushion in a Sorvall WX
Ultra 100 centrifuge (Thermo Scientific), swing-out rotor AH-629/36, for
2 h and 141′000 g at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml cold PBS,
and 50--100 µl aliquots were stored at −80°C. Reverse-transcriptase (RT)
activity of two dilutions of VLP preparations (1∶4 and 1∶8) was measured
in duplicates using the Roche Colorimetric Reverse Transcriptase Assay
(article 11468120910), and RT-activity was quantified based on the
kit\'s recombinant RT-standard (expressed quantitatively as ng/ml).

### VLP *gag* subtyping and phylogenetic analysis

The subtype of cloned *gag* was verified using the NCBI genotyping tool
( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genotyping/formpage.cgi ) and the
2009 reference set. In cases where the assigned subtype in *gag*
differed from the originally assigned *pol-* subtype, the *gag* -subtype
was chosen for denomination. In case of typing difficulties due to mixed
genotypic subtyping results, the subtype predominant in p24 was chosen.
P24 amino acid pairwise sequence alignments were performed using Clustal
Omega (DNASTAR Lasergene MegAlign Pro v11.2.1), and the Gag phylogenetic
tree was constructed by the neighbour joining method (Clustal W, DNASTAR
Lasergene MegAlign v11.2.1) and visualized using FigTree v1.3.1.

### Panel preparation and standardisation for diagnostic test evaluation

All VLP preparations used in diagnostic tests were diluted in pooled
HIV-negative human plasma (Swiss Red Cross Blood Donation Centre Zurich,
Schlieren). Dilutions were prepared in a single batch per VLP to ensure
comparable source material. Batches were aliquoted and frozen. The VLP
input for diagnostic test evaluation was based on the WHO p24
international standard (NIBSC 90/636, expressed in International Units
\[IU\]) as follows: using the bioMérieux VIDAS HIV p24 II quantitative
antigen test, five concentrations of the WHO p24 standard (20, 10, 4, 1,
0.8 IU/ml, diluted in negative plasma) were quantified for p24 pg/ml
content (table S4 in file S1 ) and an average conversion rate was
derived. To estimate the relationship between RT-quantity and p24 pg/ml,
two concentrations of RT (0.025 and 0.008 ng/ml) of four subtype B VLPs
(pBV6, 8, 11, 15) were quantified for p24 pg/ml on the bioMérieux VIDAS
HIV p24 II (figure S1), and the ratio of the average p24 pg/ml values to
input RT ng/ml quantity was derived. We thus determined that a VLP input
of 0.001 ng/ml RT was approximately equivalent to 10.3 pg/ml p24 and 2
IU/ml WHO p24 standard. For the evaluation of diagnostic tests, three
dilutions of each VLP were prepared with RT-quantities corresponding to
50, 10 and 2 IU/ml WHO p24 standard (i.e. 0.025, 0.005 and 0.001 ng/ml
RT, respectively). Frozen aliquots were stored at −20°C until analysis.

### Evaluation of diagnostic HIV tests

All commercial diagnostic HIV tests included in this study, analytical
platforms and laboratories performing the tests are listed in table S5
in file S1 . Sample aliquots were shipped frozen on dry ice. Sample
analysis was performed in a blinded fashion, and two aliquots of
HIV-negative human plasma without VLPs were included for each test.
Samples were treated according to each participating laboratory\'s
approved pre-analytical process for the respective test to be conducted.

### Heat-denaturation

Heat denaturation was performed according to published methodology
\[19\] in order to see how this procedure for immune complex disruption
and elimination of antibody-mediated interference in antigen tests
affected the detection of p24 antigen. Briefly, using the 50 IU/ml VLP
samples, 100 µl were treated with 50 µl 3× virus disruption buffer for
10 minutes at room temperature. Samples were subsequently diluted to 10
IU/ml by adding 350 µl PBS and boiled at 100°C for 5 min in a pre-heated
dry heat block.



## Results

### VLP panel characteristics

Our aim was to create a VLP panel representing the wide variety of HIV-1
sequences in the *gag* region. By replacing *gag* of the vector-encoded
viral genome with the respective sequences from different clades of
HIV-1, we generated VLPs which contained all the structural proteins
from the clades of our choice, while the RT of the particles originated
from the subtype B backbone plasmid. The enzyme gene was thus conserved
in all constructs, enabling sequence-independent quantification of all
VLPs with a commercial RT test. The resulting panel consisted of 42 VLPs
with isolate-derived *gag* of HIV-1 subtypes A, B, C, D, F, G, H,
CRF01_AE, CRF02_AG, CRF12_BF, CRF20_BG, and group O. Additionally we
included the molecular clone NL4--3 \[20\] in pCMVΔ8.91 (subtype B),
resulting in a panel of 43 VLPs.

Subtyping of the *gag* region of the 42 isolate-derived VLP constructs
showed good agreement with the originally assigned subtype in *pr-rt* in
all but seven cases. In three of these, the *gag* subtype clearly
differed from *pr-rt* , with the following discrepancies for *gag/pr-rt*
: A1/D (pBV48); CRF02_AG/F2 (pBV58); CRF02_AG/A1 (pBV10). Evaluation of
the original *pr-rt* sequences generated during drug resistance testing
showed concordance of the *rt* region with the originally assigned
subtype. Hence, for these isolates there was a true subtype discrepancy
between *gag* and *pol* , and the subtype for our panel was taken
according to *gag* . One VLP had a subtype assignment change from
CRF14_BG to CRF20_BG as a result of using the updated NCBI reference
sequence set of 2009 which contains a larger number of CRFs (the
reference set of 2005 had been used for the original *pr-rt* subtype).
Subtyping of three VLP *gags* originally assigned F1 was most difficult
(pBV42, 46 and 55). They aligned to a mixture of F1 and CRF12_BF as well
as other recombinant reference sequences across *gag* . Phylogenetic
analysis of their amino acids sequences ( figure 1 ) showed clustering
of two of these VLPs more closely with CRF12_BF reference sequences
(pBV42 and pBV55), whereas the third VLP (pBV46) could not be assigned a
specific CRF. The phylogenetic tree also showed that pBV29 clustered
together with the F1 subtype reference sequences although the original
as well as our genotyping analysis had identified this viral isolate as
CRF12_BF. We thus decided to keep this subtype assignment. All other VLP
Gag amino acid sequences clustered into the selected clades and together
with the respective Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) subtype
reference sequences. This confirmed our subtype assignment, also for
those VLPs in which *gag* and *pr-rt* subtype assignment differed.

Figure 1

**Phylogenetic relationship between Gag amino acid sequences of VLP
panel members (red) and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) subtype
reference sequences (black).**

Gag subtype reference sequences were downloaded from the LANL website
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/NEWALIGN/align.html and
filtered for subtypes present in the VLP panel. The phylogenetic tree
was constructed using the neighbour joining method (Clustal W). The
scale bar indicates branch length, expressed as the number of
substitutions per site.

To assess the diversity of our panel, we conducted pairwise amino acid
sequence comparison of p24 proteins within each clade that had more than
one representative member ( table 1 ). The same was done with matched
clades for p24 amino acid sequences of the LANL reference subtypes.
Overall weighted average diversity of our panel was 6.7% (±1.2) and 5.1%
(±1.8) for the LANL reference sequences. Within clades, our panel mainly
showed similar amino acid diversity to the LANL subtype references. The
higher diversity of our panel in some clades may result from less clean
subtypes in our virus isolates compared to the reference sequences.

### Table 1

**Amino acid sequence divergence (%) of p24 in VLP panel and LANL
reference subtypes after pairwise sequence alignment.**

VLP panel

LANL reference subtypes

n

p24

n

p24

A1

5

8.0±1.9

3

8.3±1.6

B

7

5.4±1.6

4

3.3±1.9

C

5

6.1±0.9

4

5.2±1.8

D

4

7.6±3.9

4

4.1±1.2

CRF12_BF

4

6.5±2.3

3

3.6±0.3

F2

1

N/A

N/A

N/A

G

4

6.7±1.8

4

4.6±2.8

CRF20_BG

1

N/A

N/A

N/A

H

1

N/A

N/A

N/A

CRF01_AE

4

4.7±1.8

3

4.1±1.3

CRF02_AG

5

8.3±1.9

3

4.3±0.9

group O

2

8.2

4

8.3±1.3

**weighted average**

**6.7±1.2**

**5.1±1.8**

Open in a separate window

N/A  =  not applicable; n =  number of sequences.

### Evaluation of diagnostic tests

#### Diagnostic sensitivity

In total, 16 diagnostic tests were evaluated, 11 of which were 4 ^th^
generation combo tests and five were antigen-only tests (for details see
table S5 in file S1 ). For each VLP, three input concentrations were
prepared in negative human plasma. For the lowest input concentration,
an RT-activity corresponding to a p24 concentration of 10.3 pg/ml or 2
IU/ml of the WHO p24 standard was chosen (see methods). This
concentration reflects the minimal requirement for p24 antigen detection
in order to obtain CE-marking, the European equivalent of the U.S. FDA
approval \[21\] . The intermediate and highest input contained 10 IU/ml
and 50 IU/ml, respectively, corresponding to about 50 and 250 pg/ml p24.
Dilutions of the WHO standard at these concentrations were also included
in the panel. VLPs were scored "detected" as per the manufacturers
instruction for unequivocally positive samples, i.e. samples in a
defined greyzone were scored as "not detected". Figure 2 shows the total
number of VLPs detected per input concentration for each test. Of the 11
fourth generation tests, the Abbott Architect, Roche Elecsys PT and
Siemens Enzygnost Integral 4 showed excellent subtype breadth and high
sensitivity, meaning they detected all 43 VLPs at the 50 IU/ml input
concentration and the majority of VLPs at the 10 and 2 IU/ml
concentration. The BioRad Genscreen Ultra, Abbott Prism and DiaSorin
Murex HIV also showed high subtype breadth at the two highest input
concentrations but reduced sensitivity at the 2 IU/ml concentration. The
bioMérieux VIDAS DuoUltra, Siemens Enzygnost Integral II and Siemens
ADVIA CHIV did not detect 100% of VLPs at any concentration. However,
certainly the bioMérieux VIDAS DuoUltra had overall good sensitivity for
the VLPs that were detectable. Tests with extremely poor sensitivity and
low subtype breadth were the BioRad Access and Alere Determine Combo.
They clearly failed to detect the majority of VLPs.

Figure 2

**Total number of VLPs detected per input concentration for each 4 ^th^
generation combo test and Ag-only test.**

Three input concentrations (see legend) of VLPs diluted in negative
human plasma were analysed blindly and VLPs were scored "detected" as
per the manufacturers instruction for unequivocally positive samples.
The left *y* -axis shows numbers of VLPs detected while the right *y*
-axis shows the corresponding percentage. Dotted lines indicate 50% and
100% detection.

For the antigen-only tests, sensitivity was generally higher compared to
the 4 ^th^ generation combo tests. The Roche HIV-Ag and Perkin Elmer
Alliance (a test neither CE-marked nor FDA approved) had excellent
subtype breadth and high sensitivity, detecting the large majority of
VLPs even at the 2 IU/ml concentration. The BioRad Genscreen and
Innogenetics Innotest failed to detect all VLPs, but still exhibited
good sensitivity at low input concentration. Only the bioMérieux VIDAS
p24 II showed lower subtype breadth, combined with comparably low
sensitivity for this test category. The lower sensitivity could be in
part due to the relatively high clear-positive 5 pg/ml cut-off. If the
equivocal 3 pg/ml cut-off was applied, subtype breadth was still below
100% but sensitivity at the 2 IU/ml input increased to 65% (data not
shown).

Figure 3 details the result of each test for individual VLPs and the WHO
standard. Numbers in the table indicate how many input concentrations
were detected per VLP and test. The resulting overall frequency of
positive samples for each test (VLP samples detected/all 129 VLP
samples) is listed at the right end of the table. Failure to detect a
VLP was not restricted to non-B subtypes, however, certainly for the 4
^th^ generation combo tests, subtype B VLPs were detected most
efficiently. Compared to the 4 ^th^ generation tests, the group of
antigen-only tests generally exhibited a higher sensitivity for some of
the non-B clades. This is probably due to the higher technical
sensitivity of antigen-only tests, which becomes most apparent when
comparing the total numbers of VLPs detected by tests of the same
manufacturer (such as BioRad Genscreen and the Roche tests). The WHO p24
reference standard was detected by all tests, however, at the 2 IU/ml
concentration the Abbott Prism and Siemens ADVIA CHIV narrowly missed
the cut-off (data not shown), and the Alere Determine Combo scored
clearly negative.

Figure 3

**Overview of all results per test and VLP.**

Numbers indicate how many input concentrations were detected per VLP and
test, i.e. 3 = 50, 10 and 2 IU/ml concentrations detected, 2 = 50 and 10
IU/ml detected, 1 = 50 IU/ml detected, 0 =  VLP not detected at any
concentration. The overall sensitivity for each test was calculated as
number (#) of VLPs detected (D)/total number of VLPs (n = 129, i.e. \#
of VLPs detected + \# of VLPs not detected \[ND\], excluding the WHO p24
standard).

#### Heat-treated VLPs

A modification of the p24 antigen test involving heat denaturation of
the serum or plasma sample prior to testing has been demonstrated to
improve p24 detection considerably in samples also positive for
HIV-specific antibodies, rendering p24 testing feasible for diagnosing
paediatric HIV-1 infection and, perhaps even use it instead of HIV-1 RNA
load for antiretroviral treatment monitoring \[22\] -- \[24\] . We
therefore also evaluated the effect of heat denaturation (100°C/5 min)
on the detection of the VLPs for three different tests: the antigen-only
Perkin Elmer Alliance and the 4 ^th^ generation combo tests bioMérieux
VIDAS DuoUltra and Abbott Architect. The Perkin Elmer Alliance has been
used extensively with heat-denatured samples \[25\] and the antigen-only
test of bioMérieux (VIDAS p24 II) has also been used to this end in one
study \[26\] . Figure 4 shows S/Co ratios measured in native compared to
heat-treated VLP samples at an input concentration of 10 IU/ml (VLPs
undetectable at 10 IU/ml in native samples were excluded, see figure 3
). For the Perkin Elmer Alliance, no sample showed a ≥0.5 log (or
3-fold) drop in S/Co ratio after heat treatment. The greatest loss in
signal was between 1.9--2.9 fold for four VLPs indicated in red in
figure 4 . The average drop in S/Co ratio for the remaining samples was
0.06 log. The S/Co ratio for the bioMérieux VIDAS DuoUltra dropped by
≥0.5 log for four VLPs, and the average drop for the remaining VLPs was
0.18 log. For the Abbott Architect, the S/Co ratio after
heat-denaturation dropped by more than half a log (or 3-fold) for seven
VLPs, and the average drop in S/Co ratio for the remaining VLPs was 0.23
log. Interestingly, detection of the same four VLPs was impaired after
heat-treatment in all three tests, suggesting that at least one of the
two antibodies employed in the p24 sandwich-detection used in these
tests binds the same epitope.

Figure 4

**Detection of VLPs before and after heat-denaturation at 10 IU/ml.**

VLP preparations of 50 IU/ml were diluted at 1:5 in PBS and
heat-denatured for 5 min at 100°C. Results for the non-heat treated VLPs
for the Abbot Architect and Perkin Elmer Alliance were taken from the
complete panel analysis and heat-treated VLP measurement was conducted
separately. For the bioMérieux VIDAS DuoUltra, heat and non-heat treated
samples were analysed in parallel. Highlighted in red are VLPs with loss
of p24 detection between 1.9--3-fold for the Perkin Elmer Alliance and
≥3-fold for bioMérieux VIDAS DuoUltra and Abbott Architect.



## Discussion

In this study, we have created a panel of VLPs with the aim to represent
the broad diversity of HIV-1 Gag proteins. We used this panel for
evaluation of commercial tests for the detection of p24 antigen,
including both the 4 ^th^ generation combo screening tests and dedicated
antigen-only tests.

### Virus-like particles

In addition to *gag* , we decided to clone the *pr* part of the viral
genome into a subtype B *pol* reverse-transcriptase-integrase background
to avoid the generation of a hybrid PR from mixed subtypes due to the
overlapping *gag-pol* reading frame (see Materials and Methods). We thus
also ensured optimal conditions for efficient processing of Gag by its
matching protease. The ability of PR to process Pol polyproteins from
heterogeneic subtypes is not well studied, however many CRFs have
subtype recombinations within Pol, suggesting a certain flexibility.
Furthermore, a recent study on the conservation rate of PR cleavage
sites in Gag-Pol found a high degree of conservation in Pol, suggesting
that it was evolutionary not necessary to adapt Pol cleavage sites
despite sequence variability in PR \[27\] .

With the 43 viral isolates we achieved a good genetic diversity of the
VLP panel. Comparison of the diversity of our panel with that of matched
LANL subtype reference strains showed that the two diversities were
similar, thus suggesting a good representation of global diversity in
our panel. Notably, we found subtype differences in *gag* and *pr-rt* .
Ideally, subtype identification should be performed across the whole
genome, however in routine diagnostic genotyping of patient samples this
is not the case, which should be kept in mind when drawing conclusions
about subtype-sensitivities of any given diagnostic test. Clades not
represented in our panel include J and K as well as members of HIV-1
groups N and P and HIV-2. They all have very low global prevalence and
were not available to us. In case of HIV-2, the practical relevance of
p24 detection might be low anyway, as the concentration of HIV-2
particles in plasma is usually too low for detection by p24 antigen
tests \[28\] . Furthermore, only three cases of acute HIV-2 infection
have been described since the first description of HIV-2 almost three
decades ago, making this an extremely rare event \[29\] -- \[31\] .
Nevertheless, with the current composition of the panel we have already
demonstrated significant differences in the performance of diagnostic
tests, and due to the technical flexibility of the VLP DNA construct it
will be easy to add more subtypes and CRFs as needed.

### Evaluation of diagnostic tests

The diagnostic HIV tests were evaluated at three p24 concentrations,
starting with 2 IU/ml as the minimum sensitivity required for
CE-marking, up to a very high p24 concentration of 50 IU/ml in order not
to miss any VLPs which might be detected with lower sensitivity due to
their subtype. In our hands, a concentration of 2 IU/ml of the WHO
standard was equivalent to 10.3 pg/ml p24, which compared well with
previously published estimates \[32\] . Standardisation of VLP input was
based on particle-associated RT-activity, and normalisation was
controlled by measuring p24 content of four RT-normalised subtype B VLPs
(figure S1). Their p24 concentration compared well, though the p24
content of pBV8-B was somewhat lower, which might be a result of an
amino acid point mutation of this VLP in a highly conserved region.
Suboptimal detection of this VLP was also observed across a range of
other tests ( figure 3 ). Despite this limitation, the very comparable
p24 content of the three other VLPs confirmed good input normalisation.

Among the 4th generation combo tests evaluated, the Abbott Architect had
the highest frequency of positive samples, also detecting all tested
subtypes. A comparable result (around 90% sensitivity and detection of
all subtypes) was only achieved by two other tests of this category,
namely the Roche Elecsys PT and Siemens Enzygnost Integral 4. Superior
performance in breadth of subtype detection of the Abbott Architect and
the Roche Elecsys PT was also observed in a range of other recent
smaller comparative studies \[33\] -- \[36\] . Published independent
evaluations of the Siemens Enzygnost Integral 4 do not yet exist, as
this test has only been available for a short time. Due to limited
overlap in test combinations between our study and previously published
evaluations, direct comparison of results of the other tests is not
easy. The largest recent study compared 10 fourth generation screening
tests, seven of which overlapped with our study \[34\] . The studies
agreed on best-performing (Abbott Architect and Roche Elecsys PT) and
worst-performing (BioRad Access) tests, but the ranking for the other
tests varied. This is most likely due to the different make-up and
concentrations of the test panels, highlighting the need for
standardised test material in such evaluation studies.

In our study, overall sensitivity of the antigen-only tests was better
for the majority of tests, even for those that did not detect all
subtypes (BioRad Genscreen and Innogenetics Innotest). Among the
best-performing antigen-only test was the Perkin Elmer Alliance, which
is remarkable, considering that this test was developed more than 20
years ago when much less was known about subtype diversity.

Variability in analytical test sensitivity for the different HIV-1
subtypes was most apparent at the lowest input concentration of 2 IU/ml.
Here, several tests which performed well at the two higher
concentrations, showed a large drop in VLP detection ( figure 2 ),
indicating a relatively high limit of detection. This is worrisome,
considering that the minimum sensitivity required (2 IU/ml or 10.3 pg/ml
p24) already allows for a relatively high viral load: 10 pg/ml p24 equal
approximately 100′000 copies/ml RNA (assuming 5′000 Gag molecules per
viral particle \[37\] ), a viral load also measured in a recent study
correlating p24 antigen sensitivity of the Abbott Architect with RNA
viral load \[38\] . Highly sensitive tests, such as the 4 ^th^
generation combo tests Abbott Architect and Siemens Enzygnost Integral 4
as well as the antigen-only tests, detected most of the 2 IU/ml VLP
samples with signals clearly above the positive test cut-off. This is
desirable to enable detection of primary infection as early as possible.
In the manufacturer\'s manual, many commercial tests indicate an LOD
well below 2 IU/ml when using subtype B reagents such as the WHO p24
antigen standard or the AFSSAPS panel (Agence Française de Sécurité
Sanitaire des Produits de Santé \[39\] ) (see table S5 in file S1 ).
This, of course, shortens the time to p24 detection, however, as we and
others show \[34\] , not necessarily for all subtypes. To ensure a more
appropriate determination of the LOD, equal analytical sensitivity for a
range of different subtypes should be a regulatory requirement.

Considering the recently obtained FDA approval of the Alere Determine
HIV-1/2 Ag/Ab Combo, we were surprised to see how poorly this test
performed with our panel. Not only did it miss all but a few of the
non-B VLPs, it also was the least sensitive test for the subtype B
isolates. Our results explain why the test also performed poorly in
several other studies using patient samples \[40\] -- \[42\] . In
combination, these results suggest that the Alere Determine Combo cannot
replace a 4 ^th^ generation screening test performed in the laboratory.

### Detection of VLPs after heat treatment

Previous studies have shown that a short boiling of diluted plasma or
serum samples effectively inactivates all interference by antibodies
with the detection of p24 in an antigen test \[43\] . Complementation of
the antigen test with a signal amplification procedure has further
increased the diagnostic and analytical sensitivity, leading to the
so-called "ultrasensitive p24 antigen test" (Up24) \[44\] recommended by
the WHO as an alternative to PCR for diagnosing HIV infection of
newborns in resource-poor settings \[45\] . Equally, during chronic
infection, the majority of p24 in plasma is bound in immune-complexes
and only becomes detectable after heat-mediated immune-complex
disruption \[46\] . The use of this simple methodology has great
potential in resource-limited settings, where PCR-based viral load
monitoring is often not possible. The Perkin Elmer Alliance in
combination with heat denaturation has been used successfully in several
studies as inexpensive alternative to RNA \[25\] , \[47\] . As it is
fairly labour-intensive, it would be desirable to investigate the use of
fully automated platforms for p24 detection in heat-denatured plasma
samples. However, a pre-requisite is the preservation of the p24
antibody epitope under heat-treatment. Our evaluation of the VLP panel
to this end showed that the majority of VLPs were still detectable,
albeit with decreased S/Co ratios in case of the Abbott Architect and
the bioMérieux VIDAS DuoUltra. The loss in signal for the Perkin Elmer
Alliance Up24 may be less serious than it appears here, considering that
this test has a decreased non-specific background for samples from
uninfected controls \[19\] , thus permitting to lower the cut-off of
reactivity. If, by heat denaturation, the cut-off could likewise be
lowered for the Abbott Architect and VIDAS test, they might become
attractive alternatives to the Perkin Elmer Alliance Up24 for
ultrasensitive p24 detection, as they offer fully automated testing. At
present, the Perkin Elmer Alliance exhibited the highest signal/cut-off
ratios, and there was no general decrease of p24 detection, except for
the four VLPs which were clearly impacted by heat-denaturation in all
three tests. It is unknown why these four isolates are so fundamentally
different from the others.



## Conclusion

Here we demonstrate the usefulness of our recombinant VLP panel in
assessing diagnostic tests for HIV-1 p24 antigen detection. We show that
both the breadth of subtype-sensitivity as well as the analytical limit
of detection can be assessed by this panel. The use of the VLPs\'
conserved RT enzyme activity for p24 input standardisation makes the
panel easy to employ in future studies and by other laboratories, as any
newly produced stock can simply be quantified by a commercially
available RT test. We thus believe that the panel will prove valuable
for the evaluation of diagnostic reagents in the future, because it is
comparatively easy to produce and standardise and represents an
inexhaustible non-infectious source of diverse HIV-1 p24 antigens.



## Supporting Information

#### Figure S1

**p24 quantification of four subtype B VLPs at defined RT ng/ml
inputs.** VLPs were diluted to 0.025 ng/ml RT and 0.008 ng/ml RT in
negative human plasma and p24 quantities were measured on the bioMérieux
VIDAS p24 II.

(TIF)

Click here for additional data file. ^(201K,\ tif)^

#### File S1

**Tables S1--S5.** Table S1: Primers used in this study; Table S2: PCR
cycling conditions; Table S3: NCBI GenBank accession numbers for
*gag-pr* VLP nucleotide sequences; Table S4: p24 quantification of WHO
standard on the bioMérieux VIDAS p24 II; Table S5: Commercial HIV
antigen/antibody and antigen-only tests evaluated in this study.

(DOCX)

Click here for additional data file. ^(48K,\ docx)^



## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the staff of all participating laboratories for
their help in this study.



## Funding Statement

The authors have no support or funding to report.



## Data Availability

The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully
available without restriction. VLP Gag-PR sequences are available at the
NIH genetic sequence database GenBank, accesson numbers
KJ689249-KJ689290.

