

## Request Username

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

Email\*

Close


## Create a new account

Email

Returning user


## Change Password

Old Password

New Password

close

-    Login
-    Register

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-

Email\*

Password\*

Forgot password? Reset it here

Keep me logged in

Fields with \* are mandatory

Don\'t have an account? Create one here

-

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your password?

Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset
instructions

Email\*

Cancel

CLOSE

This Journal

Enter words / phrases / DOI / ISBN / keywords / authors / etc

Search Search

Advanced search

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

Suggested Terms:

-   open access policy
-   peer review at ASM
-   what it costs to publish with ASM
-   calls for editors
-   asm journals collections

0

Login

Skip main navigation

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

JOURNALS

0

Login

::: {role="main"}

1.   ASM Journals
2.   Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
3.   Vol. 59, No. 1
4.   The R262K Substitution Combined with H51Y in HIV-1 Subtype B
Integrase Confers Low-Level Resistance against Dolutegravir

Advertisement

Research Article

23 December 2014

Share on

-
-
-
-


# The R262K Substitution Combined with H51Y in HIV-1 Subtype B Integrase Confers Low-Level Resistance against Dolutegravir

Authors : Vincent Cutillas , Thibault Mesplede , Kaitlin Anstett , Said
Hassounah , Mark A. Wainberg Authors Info & Affiliations

DOI : https://doi.org/10.1128/aac.04274-14

11
988

### Metrics

###  Total Citations   11

###  Total Downloads   988

Cite

PDF/EPUB

-    Contents

AAC

Volume 59 , Number 1 \
January 2015

-   ABSTRACT
-   INTRODUCTION
-   MATERIALS AND METHODS
-   RESULTS
-   DISCUSSION
-   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
-   REFERENCES

-
-    Information & Contributors
-    Metrics & Citations
-    References
-    Figures and Media
-    Tables
-    Share

::: section

## ABSTRACT

Clinical studies have shown that integrase strand transfer inhibitors
(INSTIs) can be used effectively against HIV-1 infection. To date, no
resistance substitution has been found in INSTI-naive patients treated
with the new integrase inhibitor dolutegravir (DTG). In a recent
selection study with DTG, using a virus bearing the H51Y substitution in
integrase, the emergence of an R to K substitution at position 262
(R262K) was observed. We characterized this double mutant with respect
to integrase strand transfer activity and susceptibility to DTG both
biochemically and in tissue culture. We showed that the addition of
R262K to H51Y decreased recombinant integrase strand transfer activity
but improved integrase DNA-binding affinity, compared to wild-type or
H51Y-containing enzymes. The defect in strand transfer activity did not
translate into a decrease in HIV-1 infectivity. The combination of H51Y
and R262K substitutions slightly decreased susceptibility to DTG (fold
change = 1.87) in cell-based resistance assays. Although viral
replication was not affected and enzyme efficiency was impaired by the
addition of R262K to H51Y, there was an overall increase in the level of
biochemical drug resistance against DTG. Our findings suggest that the R
at position 262 plays an important role in DNA binding.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

New antiretroviral (ARV) drug classes against HIV are constantly being
developed, such as the integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs)
that target the HIV-1 integrase (IN) enzyme ( 1 -- 3 ). INSTIs that are
currently available clinically, such as raltegravir (RAL), elvitegravir,
and dolutegravir (DTG) ( 4 ), act by inhibiting the strand transfer step
of viral integration, which occurs after nuclear entry and covalently
links the 3′-hydroxyl groups of viral DNA to host DNA ( 5 ). Among
INSTIs, DTG possesses the greatest genetic barrier against the emergence
of resistance substitutions and, until now, no major resistance
substitution has been observed in treatment-naive patients who have
failed treatment with this drug ( 6 , 7 ).

Our group identified an R263K variant during tissue culture selection
experiments with DTG ( 8 ). This preclinical observation has since been
confirmed for several patients who were part of a cohort of highly
treatment-experienced, INSTI-naive patients who failed DTG-based therapy
( 9 ).

In order to further characterize DTG resistance substitutions, we
identified a new R262K substitution that emerged under DTG pressure from
a virus containing an H51Y substitution, which had been previously
identified as a DTG secondary substitution ( 8 , 10 , 11 ). Primary
human cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMCs) were infected with viruses
bearing the primary resistance substitution H51Y and were grown in the
presence of DTG in order to mimic drug pressure and potential viral
escape. At week 25, a new substitution at position 262 of integrase was
observed ( 11 ). Although R262E, in association with other
substitutions, had previously been detected in a patient with HIV-1
subtype B treated with RAL ( 12 ), this is the first report of a
substitution at position 262 in the context of DTG resistance.
Furthermore, R262 has been shown to play a role in DNA binding ( 13 ).
Therefore, we characterized R262K in association with H51Y in regard to
strand transfer activity, infectivity, and resistance against DTG in
cell-based assays. Our results showed that the combination of H51Y and
R262K substitutions conferred decreased susceptibility to DTG but not
RAL, while decreasing integrase strand transfer activity.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Antiviral compounds and cell lines.

DTG and RAL were obtained from GlaxoSmithKline/ViiV Healthcare and Merck
Inc., respectively. The TZM-bl cell line was obtained from John C.
Kappes, Xiaoyun Wu, and Tranzyme, Inc., through the NIH AIDS Reagent
Program, and the 293T cell line was obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC CRL-11268). Both cell lines were maintained in
Dulbecco\'s minimal essential medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 1% (vol/vol) penicillin-streptomycin, and 1% l -glutamine.
All cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO ~2~ atmosphere.

### Plasmids, protein expression, and protein purification.

The creation of pET-15b expression plasmids coding for soluble wild-type
(WT) and H51Y-mutated HIV subtype B IN (INB) was described previously (
14 ). The R262K substitution was introduced to create the pET-15b
~INB(R262K)~ and pET-15b ~INB(H51Y/R262K)~ plasmids by using a Q5
site-directed mutagenesis kit (New England BioLabs), according to the
manufacturer\'s instructions. The primers used were INB(R262K)-F
(5′-TAGTGACATAAAAGTAGTGCCAAAAAGAAAAGCAAAGATCATCAC-3′) and INB(R262K)-R
(5′-CCTGATGATCTTTGCTTTTCTTTTTGGCACTACTTTTATGTCACT-3′). Following
mutagenesis, plasmids were treated for 4 h at 37°C with DpnI and
transformed into Escherichia coli strain XL10-Gold ultracompetent cells
(Stratagene), according to the manufacturer\'s instructions. Plasmids
were recovered from bacteria using a QIAprep miniprep kit (Qiagen),
according to the manufacturer\'s instructions. Plasmids were quantified
using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer and were subjected to DNA sequencing.

The aforementioned substitutions were inserted into the pNL4-3 WT
vector, which was obtained through the NIH AIDS Reagent Program, with
the same primers as described above, following the same protocol except
that DpnI-digested plasmids were transformed into NEB 5-alpha competent
E. coli cells (New England BioLabs). Luria-Bertani (LB) broth
(Multicell) prepared with Milli-Q water and supplemented with 100 μg/ml
ampicillin was used for all bacterial growth. Expression and
purification of N-terminally His-tagged IN recombinant proteins were
performed as described previously ( 15 ). E. coli BL21(DE3) Gold cells
(Stratagene) were used to express proteins. Recombinant protein
concentrations were measured using a calculated extinction coefficient
of 50,420 M ^−1^ cm ^−1^ ( 16 ). Recombinant protein aliquots were
stable at −80°C without degradation or loss of activity.

### Integrase strand transfer activities.

Strand transfer activities of the recombinant WT, H51Y-containing,
R262K-containing, and H51Y/R262K-containing subtype B integrase proteins
were measured using a microtiter plate assay, as described previously (
8 , 15 ). Briefly, functional DNA long terminal repeat (LTR) duplexes
were covalently bound to Costar DNA-Bind 96-well plates (Corning) at 4°C
for 48 h. The plates were then blocked with 0.5% bovine serum albumin
(BSA) for 18 h at 4°C. Before use, the plates were washed with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) and with assay buffer (50 mM
morpholinopropanesulfonic acid \[MOPS\] \[pH 6.8\], 50 μg/ml BSA, 50 mM
NaCl, 0.15% 3-\[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio\]-1-propanesulfonate
\[CHAPS\], 30 mM MnCl ~2~ ). Purified integrase proteins were then
added, and the plates were incubated for 30 min at 25°C. The
biotinylated target DNA duplex (sense,
5′-TGACCAAGGGCTAATTCACT-3′-biotin; antisense,
5′-AGTGAATTAGCCCTTGGTCA-3′-biotin) was incubated for 1 h at 37°C in
order for the strand transfer reaction to occur. Plates were then washed
twice with wash buffer (50 mM Tris \[pH 7.5\], 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween
20, 2 mg/ml BSA). A solution containing europium-labeled streptavidin
(PerkinElmer) diluted to 0.025 μg/ml in wash buffer in the presence of
50 μM diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) (Sigma) was then added
to the plates, and the plates were incubated for 30 min in the dark. The
plates were then washed, and Wallac enhancement solution was added
(PerkinElmer). Time-resolved fluorescence (TRF) was measured with a
FLUOstar Optima multilabel plate reader (BMG Labtech).

### Integrase DNA-binding activities.

The DNA-binding activities of the WT, H51Y, R262K, and H51Y/R262K
integrase subtype B proteins were measured using a fluorescence-based,
microtiter plate, DNA-binding assay, as described previously ( 17 ).
Briefly, Corning 96-well black flat-bottom polystyrene high-binding
microplates (Corning catalog no. 3925) were used to measure the
DNA-binding activities of the recombinant proteins. The plates were
coated for 18 h at 4°C with different concentrations of the recombinant
integrase proteins diluted in PBS (pH 7.4). The plates were then washed
with PBS (pH 7.4) to remove unbound proteins and were blocked with 5%
BSA at 25°C for 2 h. After blocking, the coated plates were washed twice
with ice-cold PBS and once with binding buffer (20 mM MOPS \[pH 7.2\],
20 mM NaCl, 7.5 mM MgCl ~2~ or MnCl ~2~ , 5 mM dithiothreitol \[DTT\]).
Fluorescently labeled RhoR-LTR duplex (25 nM) (LTR-D1,
5′-CTTTTAGTCAGTGTGGAAAATCTCTAGCAGT-3′; LTR-D2,
5′-RhoR-XN/ACTGCTAGAGATTTTCCACACTGACTAAAAG-3′) was then added to the
plates, and the plates were incubated for 1 h at 25°C in the dark. After
incubation, the plates were washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS. Finally,
PBS was added to each well, and the fluorescence signals were measured
with a FLUOstar Optima multilabel plate reader.

### Assay of 3′ processing.

The 3′ processing activity of the purified recombinant integrase
proteins was determined as described previously ( 18 ). Briefly,
3′-biotinylated LTR duplex was covalently linked at various
concentrations to Costar DNA-Bind plates, under conditions similar to
those described for strand transfer. To initiate 3′ processing, purified
integrase proteins (400 nM) in reaction buffer (50 nM MOPS \[pH 6.8\],
50 mg/ml BSA, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM MnCl ~2~ , 0.015% CHAPS, 5 mM DTT) were
incubated on the plates for 2 h at 37°C. Negative-control wells had only
reaction buffer added. After 2 h, the plates were quickly washed three
times with wash buffer to remove all traces of unbound material. All
subsequent steps of the assay were as described above for the strand
transfer assay.

### Generation of replication-competent virus particles for studies of HIV infectivity and drug resistance.

293T cells were transfected with 12.5 μg of plasmid using Lipofectamine
2000 (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer\'s instructions.
Fresh medium was added after 6 h of incubation, and the cells were
incubated for an additional 48 h. Supernatants were then harvested and
passed through a 0.45-μm filter in order to remove remaining cellular
debris. Virus particles were divided into aliquots and stored at −80°C.
The concentrations of virus particles were determined by measuring
reverse transcriptase (RT) activity, as described previously ( 19 ). HIV
infectivity was measured using noncompetitive short-term infectivity
assays using TZM-bl cells, as described previously ( 8 ). HIV
susceptibility to DTG and RAL was determined using short-term resistance
assays with TZM-bl cells, as described previously ( 8 ).

### Homology modeling.

A WT homology model of the HIV-1 integrase was constructed based on the
available crystal structures of the prototype foamy virus (PFV) ( 20 ,
21 ). The amino acid sequence of WT subtype B was submitted to the
I-TASSER three-dimensional protein prediction server ( 22 , 23 ). The
published PFV target capture complex crystal structure (Protein Data
Bank \[PDB\] identification no. 4E7K) was used as a lead template to
generate a WT subtype B dimeric model ( 20 , 21 ). The ProtMod server
was used to remove any sampling errors that might have been introduced
by multiple-threading alignments and iterative template fragment
assembly simulations of I-TASSER ( 22 , 23 ); the WT subtype B model
generated by I-TASSER served as a template while WT, H51Y, and
R262K/H51Y amino acid sequences were input as queries to generate models
using the program Modeler ( 24 , 25 ). Ramachandran diagram analysis (
26 , 27 ) was used to verify that all homology models possessed \>90% of
residues in the favored and allowed orientations, reflecting the
stability of the protein structure. DNA interaction hints were obtained
by overlaying the HIV-1 homology models with the PFV crystal structure
(PDB identification no. 4E7K) ( 20 , 21 ). The Research Collaboratory
for Structural Bioinformatics PDB Protein Comparison Tool was used to
assess model quality based on root mean square deviation (RMSD) values (
28 ). Rotamer orientations for mutated residues and key residues in the
active site were carefully examined, and the best backbone-dependent
rotamers were selected ( 29 , 30 ). The molecular visualization program
PyMOL, version 1.3 ( http://pymol.org ), was used for structural
visualization and image processing.

### Statistical analysis.

All experiments consisted of at least 2 sets of experiments performed in
triplicate, to yield 6 independent values for each data point, unless
indicated otherwise. For each experiment, strand transfer values
measured in the absence of drug were arbitrarily set as 100%. When
various concentrations of target DNA were employed, strand transfer
results were fitted to the Michaelis-Menten equation with the use of
GraphPad Prism 6.0 software, to generate values for maximal enzyme
activity ( *V* ~max~ ) and *K ~m~* . Enzyme efficiency ( *V* ~max~ / *K
~m~* ) was determined as described previously ( 14 ). The strand
transfer activity of the wild-type and mutant enzymes in the presence of
INSTIs was determined by using a competitive inhibition model and by
constraining the results with *K ~m~* values based on the delta target
DNA results. The *K ~m~* values for the wild-type subtype B integrase
(INB ~WT~ ), INB ~H51Y~ , INB ~R262K~ , and INB ~H51Y/R262K~ enzymes
were 2.75, 7.12, 5.12, and 3.41, respectively. Using replication
capacity experiments in TZM-bl cells in the presence of DTG or RAL, we
determined 50% effective concentrations (EC ~50~ s) for the WT and
mutant viruses, using the sigmoidal dose-response function of GraphPad
Prism 6.0. The null hypothesis for equally variant data sets was
evaluated using the Student *t* test. Significant differences were
defined as those with *P* values of \<0.05, and the underlying
distributions were two-tailed for all tests. The open source statistical
package OpenEpi ( http://www.openepi.com/Menu/OE_Menu.htm ) was used for
all tests.

::: section

## RESULTS

### The addition of R262K to H51Y decreases integrase strand transfer activities.

First, we characterized the effects of R262K, alone or in combination
with H51Y, on integrase strand transfer activities of purified
recombinant subtype B integrase (INB) enzymes ( Fig. 1 ). Using various
concentrations of the different recombinant enzymes, we showed that INB
~R262K~ and INB ~H51Y/R262K~ possessed lower strand transfer activities
than did INB ~WT~ or INB ~H51Y~ ( Fig. 1A ), while integrase activity in
the presence of H51Y was not significantly different from WT values.
Similar findings were obtained when the amount of target DNA in the
strand transfer reaction was varied ( Fig. 1B ). Enzyme kinetic results
showed that differences in strand transfer activities between INB ~WT~
and INB ~H51Y~ were not significant ( Fig. 1B and C ). Further
investigation revealed that the *K ~m~* value of INB ~R262K~ was higher
than the WT value ( *K ~m~* values of 6.977 and 5.825 nM, respectively)
( Fig. 1C ), but the combination of H51Y and R262K was restorative ( *K
~m~* = 5.087 nM), implying that the two substitutions in tandem restored
enzyme affinity for the substrate. However, the combination of H51Y and
R262K also resulted in a marked decrease in maximal DNA binding ( *V*
~max~ ), compared to the WT value ( *V* ~max~ values of 63.09 and 107.6
relative fluorescence units \[RFU\]/h, respectively). Figure 1D shows
that enzyme efficiency ( *V* ~max~ / *K ~m~* ) values for INB ~R262K~
and INB ~H51Y/R262K~ were lower than values for INB ~WT~ and INB ~H51Y~
.

FIG 1

### The addition of R262K to H51Y alters integrase LTR DNA-binding activities.

Previous studies have shown that R262 in IN is important for DNA binding
( 13 ). Therefore, we investigated the DNA-binding capacity of the H51Y,
R262K, and H51Y/R262K mutants as well as the WT enzyme, as described
previously ( 17 ), in the presence of either MgCl ~2~ or MnCl ~2~ . In
the presence of Mg ^2+^ ions, the inclusion of the R262K substitution
decreased integrase DNA-binding efficiency ( Table 1 ). In contrast, in
the presence of Mn ^2+^ ions, all of the mutant IN preparations appeared
to have higher DNA-binding activities than did WT enzyme ( Table 1 ),
although differences between INB ~H51Y~ and INB ~WT~ were not
significant ( Table 1 ). In contrast, INB ~R262K~ and INB ~H51Y/R262K~
bound DNA more efficiently than did the WT and H51Y enzymes. Overall,
the addition of R262K to H51Y altered the efficiency of integrase strand
transfer and improved DNA-binding activities.

TABLE 1

^a^

DNA-binding activities were determined with various concentrations of
recombinant integrase enzymes in the presence of either MnCl ~2~ or MgCl
~2~ . *V* ~max~ and *K ~m~* values were calculated using GraphPad Prism
software. Recombinant enzyme efficiency was determined by dividing *V*
~max~ by *K ~m~* . All studies with Mn ^2+^ were performed using three
replicate samples, and all studies with Mg ^2+^ were performed in
duplicate. SD, standard deviation.

^b^

*P* \< 0.05.

### The addition of R262K to H51Y does not affect 3′ processing.

In order to verify the observations from the DNA-binding experiments, we
tested the ability of the different mutant enzymes to perform 3′
processing, as described previously ( 10 ). The R262K and H51Y/R262K
enzymes had similar 3′ processing activities, compared to the WT enzyme.
Although the H51Y substitution appeared to result in decreased 3′
processing ( Fig. 2A ), further investigation failed to reveal
significant differences in overall enzyme efficiencies, compared to the
WT enzyme ( Fig. 2B ). Thus, the addition of R262K to H51Y did not
affect 3′ processing activity.

FIG 2

### The addition of R262K to H51Y does not impair viral infectivity.

Next, we characterized the effects of these substitutions on HIV-1
infectivity. Since the secondary R262K substitution has never been
observed alone ( 11 ), we focused on three viruses, i.e., WT, H51Y, and
H51Y/R262K. TZM-bl cells were infected with various amounts of pNL4.3
~WT~ , pNL4.3 ~H51Y~ , and pNL4.3 ~H51Y/R262K~ viruses. In agreement
with our biochemical assays, none of the H51Y, R262K, or H51Y/R262K
substitutions affected HIV-1 infectivity in tissue culture ( Fig. 3 ).

FIG 3

### The addition of R262K to H51Y decreases HIV-1 susceptibility to DTG.

To further characterize the R262K secondary substitution in the presence
of H51Y, we performed resistance assays using TZM-bl cells and various
concentrations of DTG or RAL ( Fig. 4 ), which generated EC ~50~ s for
each virus as well as fold change (FC) values ( Table 2 ). Although the
primary H51Y substitution did not confer resistance against DTG or RAL
(FC values of 1.25 and 0.98, respectively), consistent with previous
results ( 11 ), the addition of R262K did result in low-level but
significant biochemical resistance to DTG but not to RAL (FC values of
1.9 and 0.92, respectively).

FIG 4

TABLE 2

^a^

The effects of the primary INSTI resistance substitutions H51Y and R262K
on the EC ~50~ values for DTG and RAL were determined in cell culture
assays. DTG EC ~50~ values are representative of three independent
experiments. RAL EC ~50~ values are representative of two independent
experiments. SD, standard deviation.

^b^

*P* \< 0.05.

### *In silico* studies of WT and mutant HIV-1 integrases.

To gain insight into the impact of the H51Y and R262K substitutions on
HIV-1 IN, we performed structural modeling of the enzyme in the presence
of long terminal repeat (LTR) DNA, target DNA, and divalent Mn ^2+^
ions. Homology models of IN for the WT, H51Y, and R262K/H51Y enzymes
were created using the Modeler server ( 24 , 25 ), with the published
crystal structure of the prototype foamy virus (PFV) integrase (PDB
identification no. 4E7K) as a lead template ( 21 ). The modeled HIV-1 IN
showed good global agreement in the N-terminal, catalytic core, and
C-terminal domains ( Fig. 5A ). Rotamer interrogation of the key
catalytic residues (D64, D116, and E152) showed that they had
orientations similar to those seen in the PFV structure (data not
shown). In the models generated, the positions of the catalytic residues
were not altered and possessed the proper orientations needed to
coordinate Mn ^2+^ ions, which were superimposed from the PFV structure
( Fig. 5B and C ). The positions of H51Y and R262K were unchanged from
H51 and R262 (data not shown), and there were no major global shifts in
the secondary structures ( Fig. 5A ). These results are in agreement
with the absence of major changes in infectivity when the H51Y and R262K
substitutions are present.

FIG 5

::: section

## DISCUSSION

The HIV-1 IN protein contains three functional domains essential for the
integration of viral DNA into the host genome ( 31 , 32 ). R262 is part
of the C-terminal domain, which is known to bind to DNA in a nonspecific
manner ( 31 , 33 , 34 ), and R262 is known to be important for DNA
binding ( 13 ). Substitutions at position 262 from R to E or A
negatively affected DNA binding ( 13 ), in agreement with our
DNA-binding assays in the presence of Mg ^2+^ ions ( Table 1 ). In
contrast, a change to R262K increased viral DNA binding in the presence
of Mn ^2+^ ions ( Table 1 ). A possible explanation for these
observations is that mutating R (a positively charged residue) to either
E (negatively charged) or A (nonpolar) changes both the length and the
charge, resulting in a loss of electrostatic interactions or repulsion
between similar charges in the microenvironment. However, an R262K
change maintains the overall positive charge of the side chain while
causing it to be slightly shortened. This may be why the emergence of
R262K is favored over that of R262A or R262E under DTG pressure ( 11 ).

R262K was first shown to be present in cord blood mononuclear cells
(CBMCs) infected with HIV containing the H51Y substitution ( 11 ).
Although the H51Y substitution was previously shown to be nondetrimental
to viral fitness ( 10 ), as confirmed here, this study extends these
findings by showing that the addition of R262K to H51Y decreased enzyme
strand transfer activity ( Fig. 1 ) without affecting 3′ processing
activity ( Fig. 2 ) or viral infectivity ( Fig. 3 ). A possible
interpretation of these results is that the addition of R262K to H51Y
may improve DNA-binding efficiency while decreasing strand transfer
activity, resulting in a balanced overall integration process. R262K in
association with H51Y also conferred low-level *in vitro* resistance
against DTG in short-term cell-based assays ( Table 2 ), an observation
that helps to explain the selection of this substitution in viruses
containing the H51Y substitution ( 11 ). H51Y alone does not affect
viral infectivity ( Fig. 3 ) or resistance to RAL or DTG ( Fig. 4 ).
Although R262K decreases integrase affinity for target DNA ( Fig. 1 ),
this is apparently balanced by improved integrase binding to viral DNA (
Table 1 ), resulting in viruses that possess close to WT infectivity (
Fig. 3 ). This is consistent with the notion that INSTIs partly inhibit
integration by competing with the processed viral LTR DNA ends that bind
to the integrase enzyme during the integration process. Therefore, the
growth of viruses with greater LTR binding is likely to be favored in
the presence of INSTIs.

As stated above, the addition of R262K to H51Y resulted in decreased
susceptibility to DTG (FC = 1.87) ( Table 2 ), a finding consistent with
the emergence of R262K under DTG selection pressure. However, the low
levels of resistance that result may preclude the clinical occurrence of
the H51Y/R262K double mutant, consistent with the fact that no DTG
resistance substitution has yet been reported among treatment-naive
patients receiving this drug clinically.

::: section

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project was supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health
Research. S.H. is the recipient of a doctoral studentship from the Fonds
de la Recherche du Québec en Santé. K.A. is the recipient of a
fellowship from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.

We declare no competing financial interests.

V.C. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the
manuscript, T.M. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data, and
revised the manuscript, K.A. performed experiments and analyzed data,
S.H. performed the homology modeling analyses, and M.A.W. supervised the
project and revised the manuscript. All the authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

::: section