## Fig 1

FIG 1 Effects of the addition of R262K to H51Y on integrase strand transfer activity. (A) Relative strand transfer activities with various recombinant protein concentrations. Columns represent the means and standard errors of three independent experiments. (B) Relative strand transfer activities in the presence of various target DNA concentrations. Points represent the means and standard errors of seven independent experiments. (C) K m values. Columns represent the means and standard errors of seven independent observations. (D) Recombinant enzyme efficiencies, as determined by dividing V max by K m . Columns represent the means and standard errors of seven independent experiments.


## Fig 2

FIG 2 Effects of the addition of R262K to H51Y on integrase 3′ processing activity. (A) 3′ processing activity with various concentrations of viral LTR. Points represent the means and standard errors of two independent experiments. (B) Recombinant enzyme efficiency, as determined by the ratio of V max to K m . Columns represent the means and standard errors of two independent experiments.


## Fig 3

FIG 3 Effects of the addition of R262K to H51Y on viral infectivity. The effects of the WT, H51Y, and H51Y/R262K substitutions on HIV infectivity in TZM-bl cells were measured with various amounts of virus. Points represent the means and standard errors of two independent experiments.


## Fig 4

FIG 4 Effects of the addition of R262K to H51Y on susceptibility to INSTIs. (A) Resistance curves for WT, H51Y, and H51Y/R262K viruses with various concentrations of RAL. Points represent the means and standard errors of two independent experiments. (B) Resistance curves for WT, H51Y, and H51Y/R262K viruses with various concentrations of DTG. Points represent the means and standard errors of two independent experiments.


## Fig 5

FIG 5 Homology model of HIV-1 integrase subtype B. A homology model was generated based on the crystal structure of the target capture complex of PFV (PDB identification no. 4E7K). Secondary structure overlays and catalytic triad orientations and positions were examined for WT and mutant HIV-1 integrases. (A) Global overlay of the IN WT , IN H51Y , and IN R262K/H51Y models. (B and C) Close-up overlays, showing the relative positions of the catalytic triad of D64, D116, and E152 in IN WT (B and C), IN H51Y (B), and IN R262K/H51Y (C) coordinating Mn 2+ ions. Mn 2+ ion positions were simulated by inserting their coordinates from the PFV structure (PDB identification no. 4E7K) in the active site, and the ions are represented as small black spheres. Coordinates of the viral LTR and target DNA were inserted in the active site of the integrase homology models by overlap of the PFV crystal structure (PDB identification no. 4E7K). All images were processed using PyMOL software. Diagrams and carbon atom coloration differentiate the IN WT (white), IN H51Y (black), and IN R262K/H51Y (gray) homology models.


**Fig. 1 not found**

**Fig. 2 not found**

**Fig. 3 not found**

**Fig. 4 not found**

**Fig. 5 not found**

**Figure 1 not found**

