# HIV-1 drug resistance mutations in children after failure of first-line nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor-based antiretroviral therapy

T Puthanakit ,

G Jourdain ,

S Hongsiriwon ,

P Suntarattiwong ,

K Chokephaibulkit ,

V Sirisanthana ,

P Kosalaraksa ,

W Petdachai ,

R Hansudewechakul ,

... See all authors

First published: 03 September 2010

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-1293.2010.00828.x

Citations: 23

Dr Jintanat Ananworanich, The HIV Netherlands Australia Thailand
Research Collaboration (HIV-NAT), 104 Rajdamri, Bangkok, Thailand 10330.
Tel: + 662 52 040 ext 280; fax: 662 52 779; e-mail:
Jintanat.a@hivnat.org

Sections

PDF

Tools

Share

::: section

## Abstract

### Objectives

The aim of the study was to assess the prevalence, predictors and
patterns of genotypic resistance mutations in children after failure of
World Health Organization-recommended initial nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)-based treatment regimens.

### Methods

We carried out a multicentre retrospective study of genotyping tests
performed for all HIV-infected children at eight paediatric centres in
Thailand who experienced failure of NNRTI therapy at a time when
virological monitoring was not routinely available.

### Results

One hundred and twenty children were included in the study. Their median
age (interquartile range) was 9.1 (6.8--11.0) years, the median duration
of their NNRTI regimens was 23.7 (15.7--32.6) months, their median CD4
percentage was 12% (4--20%), and their median plasma HIV RNA at the time
of genotype testing was 4.8 (4.3--5.2) log ~10~ HIV-1 RNA copies/mL. The
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) resistance mutations
found were as follows: 85% of the children had M184V/I, 23% had at least
four thymidine analogue mutations, 12% had the Q151M complex, 5% had
K65R, and 1% had the 69 insertion. Ninety-eight per cent of the children
had at least one NNRTI resistance mutation, and 48% had etravirine
mutation-weighted scores ≥4. CD4 percentage \<15% prior to switching
regimens \[odds ratio (OR) 5.49; 95% confidence interval (CI)
2.02--14.93\] and plasma HIV RNA\>5 log ~10~ copies/mL (OR 2.46; 95% CI
1.04--5.82) were independent predictors of at least four thymidine
analogue mutations, the Q151M complex or the 69 insertion.

### Conclusions

In settings without routine viral load monitoring, second-line
antiretroviral therapy regimens should be designed assuming that
clinical or immunological failure is associated with high rates of
multi-NRTI resistance and NNRTI resistance, including resistance to
etravirine.

::: section

## Introduction

The widespread use of antiretroviral therapy (ART) for the treatment of
HIV-infected children has dramatically changed the course of HIV
infection, leading to reductions in morbidity and mortality \[ 1--3 \].
A triple drug combination including two nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs) plus one nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor (NNRTI) or one protease inhibitor (PI) \[ 4 \] is widely
recommended as first-line therapy. For resource-limited settings, the
World Health Organization (WHO) recommends an NNRTI-based regimen, which
is preferred because it is effective, well tolerated and inexpensive.

Plasma HIV RNA monitoring after initiation of ART is usually not
available through treatment programmes in resource-limited settings \[ 5
\]. For example, the Thai national AIDS programme provides
antiretroviral drugs for HIV-infected patients and CD4 monitoring every
6 months. Annual plasma HIV viral load monitoring was only recently
incorporated into the national programme in 2008. Thus, in the past, the
majority of Thai children were diagnosed with treatment failure when
they had clinical or immunological failure, that is a long time after
virological replication had resumed while they were still on treatment.
Consequently, resistance-associated mutations may have occurred in these
children as a result of persistent viral replication under drug
pressure.

The goal of second-line treatment is to fully suppress HIV replication;
therefore, the new regimen should comprise at least two, but preferably
three, fully active drugs. According to US guidelines, the recommended
second-line regimen for patients who experience failure of NNRTI-based
regimens is a boosted PI plus two NRTIs based on resistance testing \[ 4
\]. However, in real life in resource-limited settings, it may not be
feasible to perform individual resistance testing. There have been a few
reports on the pattern of HIV-1 drug resistance mutations in children
who experienced failure of first-line NNRTI regimens from South Africa
\[ 6 \], Uganda \[ 7 \] and Thailand \[ 8 \]. Data from an HIV-infected
adult Thai cohort showed that the majority of patients who experienced
failure of NNRTI regimens had M184V (89%), NNRTI resistance mutations
(92%), thymidine analogue mutations (37%), Q151M (8%) and K65R (6%).
High plasma HIV RNA at the time of treatment failure was associated with
a higher risk of multi-NRTI resistance \[ 9 \].

There is a new NNRTI, etravirine, which, in contrast to nevirapine and
efavirenz, requires multiple mutations to reduce drug susceptibility \[
10,11 \]. Therefore, it is important to assess the prevalence of
etravirine-associated mutations in children who have experienced failure
of first-line NNRTI treatment in order to predict the potential role of
etravirine as a component of second-line regimens. The impact of
mutations associated with etravirine has mainly been studied in the
context of PI-based salvage regimens in adults \[ 12 \].

In the present study, we aimed to describe the patterns of genotypic
resistance mutations in children after failure of WHO-recommended
initial NNRTI-based treatment regimens. The secondary objectives were to
determine the prevalence and predictors of multidrug NRTI resistance and
high-grade resistance to etravirine. The results of this study may be
useful in making decisions regarding second-line antiretroviral drug
regimens in children, especially in settings lacking access to
individual genotypic resistance testing prior to switching to a
second-line regimen, and also in planning by policy makers of the
provision of second-line regimens in their national programmes.

::: section

## Methods

We collected treatment outcome data from eight large paediatric HIV
centres in Thailand for all children who experienced failure of
NNRTI-based therapy and received a ritonavir-boosted PI regimen as
second-line treatment. Following Thai national AIDS programme,
monitoring after initiation of ART included clinical response and CD4
monitoring every 6 months. Plasma HIV RNA measurement was performed only
when treatment failure was suspected. Treatment failure was considered
to have occurred when a child showed clinical disease progression, a
suboptimal immunological response, defined as an increase in the CD4
percentage of \<5% or an increase in the CD4 count of \<50 cells/μL (age
\>5 years) over the first year of treatment, or immunological decline,
defined as a decline in the CD4 percentage of \>5% or a CD4 cell count
drop of \>30% from peak within 6 months. Genotypic resistance testing
was recommended for plasma HIV RNA \>1000 copies/mL, which has been
provided free of charge under the national programme since 2005.

For this HIV drug resistance pattern study, the inclusion criteria were
HIV infection, age \<18 years, receipt of an NNRTI-based ART regimen
containing either nevirapine or efavirenz, treatment failure on
first-line therapy, and had genotypic resistance testing within 12
months prior to switching to a second-line regimen. Children who had a
history of mono or dual NRTI therapy before starting NNRTI-based ART, or
who received an NRTI backbone other than zidovudine plus lamivudine or
stavudine plus lamivudine, were excluded from the study.

Retrospective data collection was performed using a standardized data
collection form. Information obtained from medical records included
patient demographics, HIV Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) clinical classification, history of ART, CD4 cell count and
percentage and plasma HIV RNA measurements during receipt of NNRTI-based
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and prior to switching to
PI-based HAART, and genotypic resistance test results before switching
to PI. During the period under study, viral load was not monitored
routinely, but generally tested at the time of clinical or immunological
failure. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of
all sites.

The interpretation of mutations was based on the guidelines published by
the International AIDS Society (IAS)-USA Drug Resistance Mutations group
\[ 13 \]. For this study, NRTI resistance mutations included M41L, D67N,
K70R, L210W, T215F/Y, and K219Q/E thymidine analogue-associated
mutations (TAMs), the Q151M complex, the 69 insertion complex, K65R,
L74V, K70E, Y115F and M184V/I. Multi-NRTI resistance was defined as
having at least four TAMs or the presence of Q151M or the 69 insertion.
NNRTI-associated mutations included V90I, A98G, L100I, K101E/H/P, K103N,
V106A/M, V108I, E138A, V179D/F/T, Y181C/I/V, Y188C/L/H, G190S/A, P225H
and M230L. The etravirine-weighted mutation score was calculated
according to the importance of the mutations \[ 14 \]. Four mutations
merited a weighting factor of 4: L100I, K101P and Y181C/I. Mutations
with a weighting factor of 3 were E138A/G, V179E, G190Q, M230L and
K238N. Weighting scores of 2 were assigned to K101E, V106A, E138K, V179L
and Y188L, while mutations at 11 sites had a score of 1: V90I, K101H,
V106M, E138Q, V179D/F/M, Y181F, V189I, G190E/T, H221Y, P225H and K238T.
A weight mutation score of ≥4 was interpreted as being associated with a
significant reduction in etravirine efficacy \[ 12 \]. Genotypic
resistance testing was performed using the TruGene HIV-1 Genotyping
system (Visible Genetics, Inc., Toronto, Canada) at five sites, the
ViroSeq HIV-1 Genotyping System (Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA) at one
site, and an in-house method using Stanford and IAS databases \[ 15 \]
at two sites.

### Statistical analysis

Descriptive analyses were performed to describe baseline patient
characteristics, using median (interquartile range) and frequencies as
appropriate. The proportions of patients with various NRTI- and
NNRTI-associated mutations were determined. Associations between
NNRTI-based regimens and types of mutation were evaluated using χ ^2^
and Fisher\'s exact tests as appropriate. Factors including the duration
of the NNRTI-based regimen used (per year), the CD4 percentage
(categorized as \< and ≥15%), and the plasma HIV RNA level (categorized
as plasma HIV RNA \> and ≤5 log ~10~ copies/mL) at the time of genotypic
resistance testing were examined for associations with multi-NRTI
resistance and etravirine resistance using univariate and multivariate
logistic regression analysis. Mean and median numbers of NNRTI mutations
in efavirenz- and nevirapine-exposed children were compared using
Student\'s *t* -test and the Wilcoxon rank sum test. Ninety-five per
cent confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated by Wald-based *P*
-values, and *P* \<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Analyses were performed using sas version 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC,
USA).

::: section

## Results

Between September 2002 and June 2007, there were 151 children who met
the inclusion criteria of experiencing failure of an NNRTI-based regimen
and requiring a treatment switch to a second-line PI-based regimen.
Genotype testing results were obtained for 120 children (79%). The other
31 children did not have genotype testing performed prior to switch and
did not have stored plasma available. The data were transferred from
clinical sites to the data management centre from December 2007 to
August 2008. Baseline characteristics at initiation of first-line
regimens are presented in Table 1 . Patients suffered severe
immunodeficiency prior to initiation of ART, as demonstrated by their
advanced CDC stages and low CD4 levels. The majority of children were on
stavudine, lamivudine and nevirapine. The median duration of NNRTI-based
regimens prior to genotype testing was 23.7 months. There was no
difference in duration of treatment between children who experienced
failure of nevirapine- and efavirenz-based regimens ( *P* =0.75). The
median CD4 percentage and HIV RNA at the time of genotyping were 12% and
4.8 log ~10~ copies/mL, respectively. Treatment failure was documented
as clinical failure in 38 children (32%), immunological failure in 47
children (39%), and unspecified in 35 children (29%).

Table 1. Baseline characteristics of 120 HIV-infected children who
experienced failure of nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor-based antiretroviral therapy (ART)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Clinical characteristics            Results
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
**Patient characterisitcs at        6.8 (4.6--9.2)
initiation of ART**\
Age at initiation of ART (years)
\[median (IQR)\]

Male \[ *n* (%)\]                   65 (54)

Clinical characteristics prior to
ART initiation

CDC clinical classification N:A:B:C 5:30:53:32 (4:25:44:27)
\[ *n* (%)\]

CD4 percentage \[median (IQR)\]     3 (1--8)

CD4 cell count (cells/μL) \[median  66 (20--242)
(IQR)\]

Plasma HIV RNA (log ~10~ copies/mL) 5.3 (4.7--5.9)
\[median (IQR)\]

First antiretroviral drug regimen

NNRTI \[ *n* (%)\]

Nevirapine                          91 (76)

Efavirenz                           29 (24)

NRTI \[ *n* (%)\]

Stavudine/lamivudine                88 (73)

Zidovudine/lamivudine               32 (27)

**Patient characteristics at time
of resistance testing**

Duration of NNRTI-based therapy     23.7 (15.7--32.6)
(months) \[median (IQR)\]

CD4 percentage \[median (IQR)\]     12 (4--20)

CD4 count (cells/μL) \[median       211 (93--582)
(IQR)\]

Plasma HIV RNA ^\*^ (log ~10~       4.8 (4.3--5.2)
copies/mL) \[median (IQR)\]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

-    ^\*^ Plasma HIV RNA was available for 116 children.
-   ART, antiretroviral therapy; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; IQR, interquartile range; NNRTI, nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor; NRTI, nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor.

### Genotypic drug resistance test

The frequencies of selected mutations in the reverse transcriptase gene
are shown in Tables 2 and 3 . The most commonly detected mutation was
M184V/I (85%) for lamivudine resistance. The prevalences of
multi-NRTI-associated mutations were 22.5% for at least four TAMs, 11.7%
for the Q151M complex and 1% for the 69 insertion. In the multivariate
analysis, the predictors of multi-NRTI resistance were CD4\<15% prior to
switching regimen, with an odds ratio (OR) of 5.49 (95% CI 2.02--14.93)
and plasma HIV RNA \>5 log ~10~ copies/mL, with an OR of 2.46 (95% CI
1.04--5.82) ( Table 4 ).

Table 2. Frequency of selected resistance mutations in the reverse
transcriptase gene related to nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs) in 120 HIV-infected children

Genotypic resistance mutation   Number (%)
------------------------------- ------------
NRTI
Any NRTI                        118 (98.3)
M184V/I                         102 (85.0)
Q151M complex                   14 (11.7)
K65R                            6 (5.0)
Insertion 69                    1 (0.8)
TAMs
M41L                            29 (24.2)
D67N                            48 (40.0)
K70R                            24 (20.0)
L210W                           21 (17.5)
T215F/Y                         51 (42.5)
K219Q/E                         25 (20.8)
Any TAM                         73 (60.8)
1--3 TAMs                       46 (63.0)
≥ 4 TAMs                        27 (37.0)
K70E                            1 (0.8)
L74V                            7 (5.8)
Y115F                           2 (1.7)

-   TAM, thymidine analogue mutation.

Table 3. Frequency of selected resistance mutations in the reverse
transcriptase gene related to nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NNRTIs) in 120 HIV-infected children

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
EFV-based\     NVP-based\     Total\         *P* -value
( *n* =29)     ( *n* =91)     ( *n* =120)
-------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
Any NNRTI      28 (96.6)      89 (97.8)      117 (97.5)     0.57
mutation \[
*n* (%)\]

Genotypic
resistance
mutation

L100I          3 (10.3)       0 (0)          3 (2.5)        1.00

K103N          22 (75.9)      20 (22)        42 (35)        **\<0.001**

V106A          1 (3.5)        0 (0)          1 (0.8)        1.00

V106M          0 (0)          1 (1.1)        1 (0.8)        0.76

V108I          6 (20.7)       14 (15.4)      20 (16.7)      0.83

Y181C          5 (17.2)       47 (51.7)      52 (43.3)      **0.001**

Y181I          0 (0)          1 (1.1)        1 (0.8)        0.76

Y188C          0 (0)          2 (2.2)        2 (1.7)        0.57

Y188H          2 (6.9)        0 (0)          2 (1.7)        1.00

Y188L          6 (20.7)       7 (7.7)        13 (10.8)      0.99

G190S          1 (3.5)        2 (2.2)        3 (2.5)        0.86

G190A          7 (24.1)       27 (29.7)      34 (28.3)      0.57

Etravirine                                                  0.12
mutation
scores ^\*^

No mutation    14 (48.3)      24 (26.4)      38 (31.7)

1--2           6 (20.7)       17 (18.7)      23 (19.2)

2.5--3.5       0 (0)          2 (2.2)        2 (2.4)

≥4             9 (31.0)       48 (52.8)      57 (47.5)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Values in bold denote *P* -value \<0.05.
-   Only major NNRTI mutations are shown.
-    ^\*^ Etravirine mutation scores are based on Madruga *et al.* \[ 12
\].
-   EFV, efavirenz; NVP, nevirapine.

Table 4. Predictive factors of multiple nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor (NRTI) resistance among children who experienced failure of
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)-based
antiretroviral therapy (ART)

Factor                                               Multiple NRTI resistance \[ *n* / *N* (%)\]   Univariate                         Multivariate
---------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- -------------------- ------------- -------------------- ------------
OR (95% CI)          *P* -value    OR (95% CI)          *P* -value
Duration of NNRTI-based ART (years)
1                                                    0/4                                           --                   --            --
2                                                    16/45 (35.6)                                  1                                  --
3                                                    13/42 (31.0)                                  0.81 (0.33--1.99)    0.649         --
\>3                                                  15/29 (51.7)                                  1.94 (0.75--5.02)    0.171         --
HIV RNA prior to switch to PI (log ~10~ copies/mL)
≤5                                                   4/23 (17.4)                                   1                                  1
\>5                                                  38/93 (40.9)                                  3.42 (1.53--7.66)    **0.003**     2.46 (1.04--5.82)    **0.040**
CD4 percentage prior to switch to PI
\<15%                                                38/75 (50.7)                                  6.68 (2.53--17.64)   **\<0.001**   5.49 (2.02--14.93)   **0.001**
≥15%                                                 6/45 (13.3)                                   1                                  1

-   Values in bold denote *P* -value \<0.05.
-   Multi-NRTI resistance was defined as having at least four thymidine
analogue mutations (TAMs) or the presence of the Q151M complex or
insertion 69.
-   CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio; PI, protease inhibitor.

The most common NNRTI mutations were Y181C/I (44%), K103N (35%) and
G190A/S (31%). The K103N mutation was more common in children who
received efavirenz than in those who received nevirapine ( *P* \<0.001),
while Y181C was more common among children who received nevirapine ( *P*
=0.001). Forty-eight per cent of children had etravirine
mutation-weighted scores ≥4. There was a trend towards a higher rate of
etravirine mutation scores ≥4 among children who received nevirapine
than among those on efavirenz (52.8% *vs* . 31.0%; *P* =0.12). In the
univariate analysis, there was no association between the duration of
NNRTI treatment, the CD4 percentage, or plasma HIV RNA and the risk of
etravirine resistance.

::: section

## Discussion

This study investigated the HIV resistance pattern in children with
treatment failure on WHO-recommended first-line NNRTI-based ART.
Eighty-five per cent of the children had resistance to lamivudine, and
about a quarter of the children had multi-NRTI resistance mutations
conferring resistance to all NRTI drugs, which limit opportunities for
recycling NRTIs as a component of the second-line PI-based regimen.
Ninety-eight per cent of the children had at least one mutation related
to NNRTIs, with half having high-grade etravirine resistance. A CD4
percentage \<15% and an HIV RNA \>5 log ~10~ copies/mL at the time of
genotype testing predicted multi-NRTI resistance.

First-line NNRTI-based treatment failure is a major public health
problem, especially in children, because of the limited availability of
approved second-line antiretroviral drugs and access to new drugs.
Moreover, the lack of routine viral load monitoring in many
resource-limited countries leads to delay in early detection of children
who have virological failure. This causes accumulation of mutations
within the NRTI and NNRTI drug classes until treatment failure is
finally diagnosed on the basis of clinical or immunological criteria \[
16 \]. Lapphra *et al.* reported that 8.4% of Thai children who started
NNRTI regimens had treatment failure at 24 months \[ 17 \]. Jittamala
*et al.* \[ 18 \] recently showed that 20% of Thai children had
virological failure within 5 years of starting NNRTI-based regimens,
with the majority failing in the first 12 months. These reports
underscore the need for an understanding of resistance development, in
order to design effective second-line regimens, especially if the
availability of genotype testing is limited. Recently, the National
Health Security Office, which provides ART to almost all HIV-infected
Thai children, reported that 20% of HIV-infected Thai children are
receiving second-line PI regimens. The regional Asian network, Treat
Asia, which follows over 1000 children, also reported that 20% of
children were on second-line ART \[ 19 \].

The children in our study were from eight large paediatric HIV centres
in Thailand. Similar to other studies on children from South Africa \[ 6
\] and Thailand \[ 8,18 \], extensive NRTI mutations were found. The
rate of multi-NRTI resistance with at least four TAMs was as high as
23%, which limits the potential for recycling of NRTIs, including
tenofovir. A reduction in the efficacy of tenofovir has been reported in
the presence of the K65R mutation or at least three TAMS inclusive of
M41L or L210 \[ 20 \]. The prevalence of K65R was only 5%, which is
similar to that in Thai adults \[ 9 \], but lower than the 15% reported
in South African children \[ 6 \], and the 23% reported in Malawian
adults \[ 21 \], which could be explained by differences in HIV subtypes
or duration of treatment. There was no difference in the frequency of
K65R between children who received zidovudine (6.3%) and those who
received stavudine (4.5%). Tenofovir is currently approved for adults,
and the results from randomized trials in children will be available in
2010. As tenofovir is usually the only NRTI with some antiviral activity
that remains an option in children with multi-NRTI resistance, the
ability to use tenofovir in second-line regimens will increase the odds
of viral suppression.

We found that around 98% of children had NNRTI resistance mutations that
would render nevirapine and efavirenz ineffective. As previously
reported, Y181C was mostly associated with nevirapine failure, while
K103N was associated with efavirenz failure \[ 22 \]. Etravirine is a
new drug in the NNRTI class that continues to have antiviral activity
after the development of a few NNRTI mutations, especially if those
mutations do not include Y181C \[11\]. Using a weighted scoring system
for assessing etravirine resistance, \[ 14 \] we found that almost half
of our children had high-grade etravirine resistance, which was higher
than the proportion found in other reports in children \[ 23 \] and in
adults \[ 24 \]. Etravirine has been used successfully in adults with
multi-class failure as an alternative to PI-based salvage regimens \[ 12
\]. It is not yet approved in children, but studies are ongoing to
evaluate the efficacy of this drug in the setting of triple class
failure. Our data show that the opportunity to use etravirine in late
NNRTI failure is limited because of the high rates of high-grade
etravirine resistance.

In this study, high viral load was a predictor of multi-NRTI resistance,
which is similar to results from a Thai adult study \[ 9 \]. A CD4
percentage of \<15% at the time of failure also predicted multi-NRTI
resistance. Similarly, in a study of Malawian adults who failed
first-line ART, patients with CD4 counts \<100 cells/μL had a 6.1-times
higher risk of harbouring the K65R resistance mutation \[ 21 \]. Similar
to a report in Thai adults, we could not find predictors of high-grade
etravirine resistance \[ 24 \]. Among four children who developed
treatment failure within the first year of treatment, there was no
multi-NRTI resistance. This suggests that early viral load monitoring,
at least during the first year of treatment, could aid the detection of
early failure and the design of an optimal second-line regimen. Gupta
*et al.* conducted a meta-analysis in an HIV-infected adult population,
which showed that patients treated in settings with virological
monitoring less frequent than every 3 months had a higher risk of NNRTI
resistance, TAMs, and lamivudine resistance \[ 25 \]. Recently, the Thai
national programme began to provide yearly viral load monitoring. There
are ongoing efforts to make viral load monitoring feasible in
resource-limited settings, for example using the dried blood spots
technique \[ 26 \].

Our study has several limitations. Firstly, its retrospective design
could have resulted in incomplete data collection and failure to include
children who died before switching to second-line therapy; however, this
kind of bias would probably have led to an underestimation of the impact
of drug resistance. Secondly, the population in this study was at an
advanced disease stage, with very low baseline CD4 percentages prior to
ART initiation and at the time of treatment switch, which may have
resulted in bias towards high rates of multi-drug resistance. However,
this reflects real life situations in most resource-limited settings
where treatment failure is usually detected when patients experience
immunological or clinical failure. Thirdly, all the sites involved in
this study followed the practice guidelines set by the Thai Ministry of
Public Health by having CD4 monitoring at least every 6 months, and
having viral load measurements performed only when patients met the
criteria for immunological or clinical failure. Therefore, we do not
have information on the duration of virological failure prior to the
genotypic resistance testing. However, we used the duration of the
NNRTI-based regimen as a surrogate marker for the analysis of the
predictors of multi-drug resistance.

In summary, in children who did not have access to routine viral load
monitoring and who experienced failure of WHO-recommended first-line
NNRTI therapy, there were high rates of lamivudine, nevirapine and
efavirenz resistance. Multi-NRTI resistance was found in a quarter of
patients and almost half had high-grade etravirine resistance.
Therefore, the appropriate second-line regimen is a boosted PI-based
regimen, with a limited role for etravirine. Further studies should be
carried out to determine whether routine viral load monitoring for
children would reduce the rate of multi-drug resistance and have any
additional benefit in improving outcomes of second-line regimens in
HIV-infected children living in resource-limited settings.


## Acknowledgements

The study was funded by the Commission of Higher Education, Ministry of
Education, Bangkok, Thailand. The data collected were from the Pediatric
PHPT cohort study ( *n* =36), Queen Sirikit National Institute of Child
Health, Bangkok ( *n* =32), HIVNAT, Thai Red Cross AIDS Research Center,
Bangkok ( *n* =21), Chiang Mai University Hospital, Chiang Mai ( *n*
=15), Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok ( *n* =5), Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen ( *n* =4), Petchburi Provincial Hospital,
Petchburi ( *n* =4) and Chiang Rai Regional Hospital, Chiang Rai ( *n*
=3). We would like to thank the study team: T. Bunupuradah, C. Phasomsap
and P. Kaew-on \[The HIV Netherlands Australia Thailand Research
Collaboration (HIV-NAT), The Thai Red Cross AIDS Research Centre,
Bangkok\]; S Kanjanavanit \[Program for HIV Prevention and Treatment,
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD) UMI 174, Department of
Medical Technology, Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand\] would like to acknowledge the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis (which supported drug and
laboratory monitoring for some children) and the study team as follows:
S Kanjanavanit (Nakornping Hospital, Chiang Mai); T. Hinjiranandana
(Somdej Pranangchao Sirikit Hospital, Chonburi); P. Layangool (Bhumibol
Adulyadej Hospital, Bangkok); N. Kamonpakorn (Somdej Prapinklao
Hospital, Bangkok); S. Buranabanjasatean (Mae Chan Hospital, Chiang
Rai); C. Ngampiyaskul (Prapokklao Provincial Hospital, Chantaburi); T.
Chotpitayasunondh, S. Chanpradub and P. Leawsrisuk (Queen Sirikit
National Institute of Child Health, Bangkok); S. Chearskul, N.
Vanprapar, W. Phongsamart, K. Lapphra, P. Chearskul, O. Wittawatmongkol,
W. Prasitsuebsai, K. Intalapaporn, N. Kongstan, N. Pannin, A.
Maleesatharn and B. Khumcha (Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University); L. Aurpibul, N. Wongnum
and R. Nadsasarn \[Research Institute for Health Sciences (RIHES),
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai\]; P. Lumbiganon, P. Tharnprisan and
T. Udompanich (Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen
University); M. Yentang (Petchburi Hospital, Petchburi); A. Khonponoi,
N. Maneerat, S. Denjunta, S. Watanaporn, C. Yodsuwan, W. Srisuk, S.
Somsri and K. Surapanichadul (Chiang Rai Regional Hospital, Chiang Rai).
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Nneka Edwards-Jackson for her
help with manuscript preparation.


##

Citing Literature

Volume 11 , Issue 9

October 2010

Pages 565-572

-

## References

-

## Related

-

## Information

### Recommended

-
Triple nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor‐ vs. nonnucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitor‐containing regimens as first‐line
therapy: efficacy and durability in a prospective cohort of French
HIV‐infected patients

L Cuzin , P Pugliese , F Bugnon , C Delpierre , E Cua , E Billaud ,
P Massip , F Raffi , P Dellamonica ,

HIV Medicine

-
Treatment of primary HIV‐1 infection with nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor‐based therapy is effective and well
tolerated

S Portsmouth , N Imami , A Pires , J Stebbing , J Hand , M Nelson ,
F Gotch , BG Gazzard ,

HIV Medicine

-
Impact of reverse transcriptase resistance on the efficacy of TMC125
(etravirine) with two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors in
protease inhibitor-naïve, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor-experienced patients: study TMC125-C227

K Ruxrungtham , RJ Pedro , GH Latiff , F Conradie , P Domingo , S
Lupo , W Pumpradit , JH Vingerhoets , M Peeters , I Peeters , TN
Kakuda , G De Smedt , B Woodfall , on behalf of the TMC125-C227
study group ,

HIV Medicine

-
Drug-resistance development differs between HIV-1-infected patients
failing first-line antiretroviral therapy containing nonnucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors with and without thymidine
analogues

MM Santoro , C Sabin , F Forbici , L Bansi , D Dunn , E Fearnhill ,
E Boumis , E Nicastri , A Antinori , G Palamara , A Callegaro , D
Francisci , A Zoncada , F Maggiolo , M Zazzi , CF Perno , F
Ceccherini-Silberstein , C Mussini ,

HIV Medicine

Download PDF

back


## Additional links

### About Wiley Online Library

-   Privacy Policy
-   Terms of Use
-   About Cookies
-   Manage Cookies
-   Accessibility
-   Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
-   Developing World Access

### Help & Support

-   Contact Us
-   Training and Support
-   DMCA & Reporting Piracy

### Opportunities

-   Subscription Agents
-   Advertisers & Corporate Partners

### Connect with Wiley

-   The Wiley Network
-   Wiley Press Room

Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All
rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training
of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```


