# Evolution of a novel pathway leading to dolutegravir resistance in a patient harbouring N155H and multiclass drug resistance


Objectives

Dolutegravir has been recently approved for treatment-naive and
-experienced HIV-infected subjects, including integrase inhibitor
(INI)-experienced patients. Dolutegravir is a second-generation INI that
can overcome many prior raltegravir and elvitegravir failures. Here, we
report the evolution of resistance to dolutegravir in a highly
treatment-experienced patient harbouring the major N155H mutation
consequent to raltegravir treatment failure.

Methods

Genotypic and phenotypic analyses were done on longitudinal samples to
determine viral resistance to INIs. Integrase amino acid sequence
interactions with raltegravir and dolutegravir were assessed by
molecular modelling and docking simulations.

Results

Five mutations (A49P, L68FL, T97A, E138K and L234V) were implicated in
emergent dolutegravir resistance, with a concomitant severe compromise
in viral replicative capacity. Molecular modelling and docking
simulations revealed that dolutegravir binding to integrase was affected
by these acquired dolutegravir mutations.

Conclusions

Our findings identify a novel mutational pathway involving integrase
mutations A49P and L234V, leading to dolutegravir resistance in a
patient with the N155H raltegravir mutation.




## Methods

### HIV viral load measurements and CD4 T cell counts

HIV RNA plasma viral loads were determined using the Versant HIV-1 RNA
3.0 assay (bDNA, Bayer HealthCare) until June 2010 and the Abbott
Real-Time HIV-1 kit thereafter. CD4 T cell counts were evaluated every
3--6 months as suggested by Quebec provincial guidelines (
http://publications.msss.gouv.qc.ca/acrobat/f/documentation/2010/10-337-02W.pdf
).

### Genotypic resistance analysis

The full-length integrase (867 bp) and protease/reverse transcriptase
(1467 bp) genes were analysed by nested RT--PCR and sequenced using the
BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing v1.0 Ready Reaction kit (Life
Technologies), as previously described. ^\ \ 9\ ,\ \ \ 10^ Briefly,
sequences were compared with HXB2 by using Seqscape v2.5 (Applied
Biosystems) to determine substitutions. Resistance interpretations were
subsequently assessed by Stanford HIVdb v7.0 (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/ ).

### Phenotypic resistance analysis

The previously genotyped plasmas were sent for analysis of phenotypic
susceptibility to INIs, NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs to Monogram Biosciences,
where the highly sensitive phenotypic resistance assays PhenoSense
and PhenoSense Integrase (Monogram Biosciences) were performed.

### Structural bioinformatics: integrase modelling and dolutegravir docking simulations

To model interactions of integrase with raltegravir and dolutegravir,
integrase amino acid sequences prior to treatment with INIs (29 August
2009) and following raltegravir failure (16 February 2012) and
dolutegravir failure (30 October 2013) were submitted to the I-TASSER 3D
protein prediction server, as previously described. ^\ \ 11\ ,\ \ \ 12^
Apparent binding poses and energies of dolutegravir interactions at the
active site of modelled integrase proteins were calculated by *in
silico* docking simulations performed with the program AutoDockVina.
^\ \ 13^ The viral DNA mimic, cations and active site water molecules
from 3S3M were retained in equivalent positions within the HIV active
sites to aid in assessment of INI binding. Prior to docking, ligands and
receptor proteins were processed in AutoDockTools. ^\ \ 14^ All
subsequent image processing and analysis was performed in pymol (
http://pymol.org/ , PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3;
Schrödinger, LLC).


## Results

### Patient history

This patient had been under HIV treatment for 20 years and had received
drugs against all available ARV targets, including raltegravir (5
October 2009 to 21 April 2010; 11 May 2011 to 15 February 2012) and
dolutegravir (15 February 2012 to 10 March 2014). Evolution of viral
load and CD4 T cell counts over time is depicted in Figure 1 . Over 20
years of treatment, a slow decline of CD4 T cell count was observed
(from 549 cells/mm ^3^ in 1994 to 160 cells/mm ^3^ in 2014). Short
treatment interruptions (years 2000, 2008 and 2011) led to episodic
bursts in viral load but this did not influence the overall decline
(Figure 1 ). In addition, it should be noted that viral load since 1994
became undetectable (\<40 copies/mL) only once (not shown) as a result
of adding dolutegravir to the treatment regimen (1 May 2012).
Nevertheless, viral load rebound occurred the following month.



As previously mentioned, the patient was heavily treatment experienced.
Genotypic analysis revealed a dominant MDR virus harbouring mutations
conferring resistance to NRTIs (M41L, D67N, V118I, M184V, L210W, T215Y)
and NNRTIs (K101P, K103N/S, V108I, V179T, V189I), as well as PIs (L10F,
I13V, K20M, V32I, L33F, M36I, M46L, I54L, K55R, L63P, A71I, G73A, I84V,
L90M). The cumulative effects of this resistance profile on phenotypic
susceptibility to NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs are depicted in Table 1 . As
expected, the viral population showed multiclass drug resistance to all
ARV drugs, with limited residual activity for tenofovir and tipranavir.


### Evolution of resistance to INIs

From October 2009, INIs were included in ARV regimens. A pre-INI
genotype revealed many natural polymorphisms associated with resistance
to INIs (R20K, V31I, L45I, L101I, I135V, E157Q, K160Q, V201I, K215N and
A265V), none of which conferred reduced phenotypic susceptibility to
raltegravir, elvitegravir or dolutegravir (Table 2 ). Subsequent to
raltegravir treatment failure, the patient acquired N155H (October
2010), which persisted thereafter on raltegravir- or
dolutegravir-containing regimens. This mutation conferred 14.3-fold and
29.6-fold reductions in raltegravir and elvitegravir susceptibility,
respectively (Tables 2 and 3 ). Although N155H briefly disappeared
during a transient treatment interruption (February 2011),
re-introduction of raltegravir in May 2011 led to its reappearance, with
the subsequent acquisition of S119R, S147G and V151I in February 2012.
This resistance profile led to a 34.6-fold and 56.3-fold elevated
cross-resistance to raltegravir and elvitegravir, respectively (Tables 2
and 3 ). The virus remained sensitive to dolutegravir (1.9-fold
resistance) and the patient was switched to a dolutegravir-based regimen
in February 2012.

The patient developed treatment failure with 63.6-fold resistance to
dolutegravir and a maximum of 150-fold cross-resistance to raltegravir
and elvitegravir (Table 2 ). The N155H, S119R, S147G and V151I mutations
that were acquired secondary to raltegravir usage persisted throughout
dolutegravir treatment. The acquisition of T97A and E138K led to a
37-fold reduction in dolutegravir susceptibility. The sequential
acquisition of the A49P, L68FL and L234V mutations after dolutegravir
usage led to a further 63-fold decline in phenotypic susceptibility to
dolutegravir.

The sequential acquisition of dolutegravir resistance mutations was
associated with significant declines in viral replicative capacity (41%)
relative to levels observed (101%--187%) prior to use of dolutegravir in
treatment (Table 2 ). Consistent with this negative effect on
replication, we were unable to grow the virus in culture (data not
shown), although p24 antigen was detected.

### Integrase modelling

Insofar as emergent clinical resistance to dolutegravir is rare and
largely undefined, structural bioinformatics were used to gain insights
regarding the impact of mutations arising following treatment failure on
raltegravir- and dolutegravir-based regimens. Three-dimensional models
of viral nucleotide sequences of integrase prior to INI exposure (25
August 2009), following raltegravir failure (16 February 2012) and
dolutegravir failure (30 October 2013) were obtained (Figure 2 ). After
raltegravir failure via the N155H mutation, the positions of active site
catalytic residues (D64, D116, E152) and orientations remained
relatively unchanged (Figure 2 a), as has been previously reported.
^\ \ 15^ The substituted N155H affected the electrochemistry of the
active site, potentially forming a salt bridge with E152 and a hydrogen
bond with T66, without seriously modifying global integrase structure.
Minor steric rearrangements provided by the accessory mutations S119R,
I135V and V151I might allow integration in the presence of N155H.

In contrast, the acquisition of the five additional resistance mutations
with dolutegravir (A49P, T97A, E138K, S147G and L234V) led to major
deviations between pre- and post-dolutegravir integrase structures in
the loop region flanked by the C65 and M50 residues (indicated by black
arrows in Figure 2 b). The mis-positioning of D64 completely outside the
active site (Figure 2 b and c) suggests a marked impairment in the
ability of the virus to integrate. Whereas the A49P and L234V mutations
were distal to the active site, T97A, E138K and S147G were in close
proximity to the catalytic residues (Figure 2 c). More importantly, A49P
and L234V were in close proximity to each other, and may have been the
catalyst for major structural changes following the use of dolutegravir.
Indeed, the disordered loop seen in the structure extending from residue
50 to residue 65 was directly downstream of position 49P (Figure 2 c).

### Dolutegravir docking simulations

To mimic the drug binding of dolutegravir *in vivo* , dolutegravir was
docked to dimeric structures using DNA and Mg ^2+^ derived from the
prototype foamy virus (PFV) structure 3S3M co-ligands. After docking,
the relative position of dolutegravir crystallized into the PFV
structure was used as a visual guide for properly docked dolutegravir.
As expected, dolutegravir docked easily to both pre-INIs (data not
shown) and post-raltegravir integrase structures in the predicted 'most
energetically favourable (1/40)' poses (Figure 2 d). In contrast,
dolutegravir did not bind favourably in the post-dolutegravir model
(Figure 2 e--g). Indeed, docking of dolutegravir to the
post-dolutegravir structure shows that binding was favourable (1/40) to
the viral DNA mimic (Figure 2 e), but less favourable (9/40) to the
disordered loop (Figure 2 f). Furthermore, it was shown that
dolutegravir docked far less favourably (29/40) in a similar position to
the co-crystallized pose (Figure 2 g) relevant mechanistically for
strand-transfer inhibition. ^\ \ 4\ ,\ \ \ 16^ Taken together, docking
simulations point to compromised dolutegravir binding to integrase as a
potential source for emergent resistance. The fact that dolutegravir was
still able to bind with the 29th most favourable pose shows that
dolutegravir may retain low-level activity despite the presence of some
potentially relevant mutations.


## Discussion

Dolutegravir has been recently approved for treatment of HIV infection.
As a second-generation INI, it may be able to overcome many prior
raltegravir and elvitegravir failures. This has been demonstrated in
both *in vitro* studies and the VIKING-3 study, where dolutegravir was
evaluated in therapy-experienced adults harbouring INI-resistant
viruses. ^\ \ 4\ ,\ \ \ 8^ The VIKING-3 study showed that viruses with
resistance mutations at positions 155, 143 and mutants with T66I or E92Q
were more susceptible to dolutegravir than those with mutations at
position 148 (if associated with secondary mutations). ^\ \ 8^
Importantly, VIKING-3 subjects harbouring viruses with substitutions at
codon 66, 149 or 155 achieved viral suppression at week 24 in 100%, 75%
and 88% of patients, respectively. ^\ \ 8\ ,\ \ \ 17^ However, viral
suppression at week 24 was observed in only 59% and 24% of subjects when
the viral strains contained a substitution at codon 148 plus one and
more than two secondary mutations, respectively. Consequently,
dolutegravir has been recommended for salvage therapy in patients
resistant to raltegravir or elvitegravir that do not have integrase
mutations Q148H/K/R plus two or more secondary mutations.

In the present case, a switch from raltegravir to dolutegravir was
performed in February 2012 after the N155H mutation was first detected.
To determine whether prior resistance to raltegravir through N155H
affected dolutegravir activity, we performed retrospective phenotyping
of the virus from the time of switch for raltegravir, elvitegravir and
dolutegravir. As expected, this raltegravir-resistant virus was
susceptible to dolutegravir. Nevertheless, the dolutegravir activity
rapidly diminished, as phenotyping results for December 2012 showed a
fold change of 37. This phenotypic resistance was associated with the
acquisition of several integrase mutations in addition to the
persistence of N155H.

Among the natural polymorphisms identified, V31I, L101I, V201I and A265V
are part of 34 highly polymorphic sites in the integrase gene that have
been shown to have no effect on viral susceptibility to dolutegravir.
^\ \ 18^ In addition to the N155H mutation, other INI-resistance
mutations (T97A, S119R, E138K, S147G and V151I) emerged after
re-introduction of raltegravir (Table 3 ). V151I is a polymorphic
accessory INI-resistance mutation selected in raltegravir-treated
patients. E138K has been described to confer resistance to dolutegravir
and mainly occurs with Q148 mutations. ^\ \ 19^ S147G has been
frequently selected in patients receiving elvitegravir, with minimal
effects on raltegravir. ^\ \ 20^ T97A alone does not affect raltegravir
susceptibility, but has been shown to reduce raltegravir efficacy in
combination with Y143C/R. ^\ \ 21^ Interestingly, the addition of the
T97A and E138K to the other INI-resistance mutations mentioned above has
been observed to be accompanied by a dramatic decrease in viral
replicative capacity. Our findings show the acquisition of three
hitherto unreported new mutations consequent to dolutegravir treatment
failure: A49P, L68F (as a mixture with wild-type) and L234V. More
precisely, A49P and L234V were detected after 20 months of dolutegravir
therapy, and L68F/L slightly thereafter (23 months). The step-wise
acquisition of hitherto unreported integrase resistance mutations
suggests a novel dolutegravir resistance pathway rather than selection
of rare pre-existent minority species.

With the exception of the N155H substitution, all the accessory amino
acid substitutions observed during raltegravir treatment resulted from
G→A transitional mutations. In contrast, the previously noted
raltegravir-associated mutations T97A, E138K and S147G result from G→A
mutations while A49P and L234V represent G→C transversions. ^\ \ 22^ Two
major factors may affect the ability of a particular mutation to arise
following treatment failure: (i) the ease with which that mutation can
occur; and (ii) the selective advantage imparted by the phenotypic
expression of that mutation. Even without considering the APOBEC
proteins, ^\ \ 23^ transition mutations occur more frequently than
transversion mutations. Although the impact of a transition mutation on
double-stranded DNA structure is minor, the presence of a transversion
mutation usually implies a strong selective pressure ^\ \ 22^ \[such as
for N155H (A→C transversion)\], which confers high-level resistance to
raltegravir. In our case, two of five dolutegravir-associated
substitutions (A49P and L234V) resulted from G→C or C→G transversions,
implying strong selective pressure. It is known that major pathways of
selectively favourable mutations in HIV either increase or cause
resistance and/or recover activity losses caused by a previous
resistance substitution. Experiments are currently under way to
construct viruses carrying the A49P and/or L234V mutations by
site-directed mutagenesis and evaluate their susceptibility to
dolutegravir, raltegravir and elvitegravir and their effect on virus
replication capacity.

To further characterize these mutations, structural bioinformatics
analyses were performed. Two key changes were identified that may have
driven the virus to become resistant to dolutegravir: the A49P and L234V
mutations (Figure 2 ). These transversion mutations are within
interaction distance of each other (∼4 Å). The A49P substitution is
particularly interesting due to the known steric role of proline and the
ability of *cis* -- *trans* isomerization to drastically affect protein
structure. ^\ \ 24^ More precisely, this mutation is probably
responsible for the mis-positioning of the catalytic D64 residue, as
observed in Figure 2 (b and c). Indeed, if A49P along with the L234V
substitution caused a loss in integration, the impact on dolutegravir
binding might have outweighed the need of the virus to integrate; in our
binding simulations proper binding of dolutegravir was difficult to
achieve (Figure 2 e--g). Conversely, post-dolutegravir integrase may be
able to fold in a manner that facilitates altered target and viral DNA
binding, thereby allowing integration to proceed at a much lower, though
uninhibited, rate. To test this hypothesis, more models will need to be
tested and molecular dynamics studies performed.

In conclusion, our findings have shown a novel mutational pathway
involving A49P and L234V, leading to emergent dolutegravir resistance in
a patient on salvage therapy with the N155H mutation. INI salvage
therapy with dolutegravir should be used with caution in raltegravir
failures even if Q148 resistance mutations are not present.
