## Figure 1

Figure 1 shows the ML tree of 119 NFLG sequences, including the 23 subtype B variants sequenced in this study, 57 non-redundant B sequences from Brazil and 39 reference strains (GenBank and Los Alamos database) representing subtypes A-D, F-H, J and K. The 23 sequences fell into the clade B reference group (100% aLRT), with an overall mean genetic diversity of 9.9%. Close inspection of the tree indicated small transmissions clusters (an excess of 80% aLRT support) of only two groups composed of 2 to 3 infections per cluster sampled from Pernambuco, but in general there was no clustering of subtype B NFLG viruses based on their geographical region. Similar levels of genetic diversity were observed when sequences were compared from PE to those from RJ, SP, and MG.


**Figure 2 not found**

## Figure 3

Figure 3 shows the regional distribution of HIV-1 subtypes in the four regions. Although sample sizes from these regions were small, the genetic diversity in the proviral NFLGs and larger fragment sequences for cases not yielding NFLGs was significant in all four regions. Multiple HIV-1 subtypes were cocirculating in infected blood donors, with at least 4 subtypes in SP and 3 in PE, RJ and MG. Subtype B was detected among donors in all four regions: PE (9 of 11), MG (3 of 7), and RJ (4 of 10), and SP (12 of 17). The HIV BF1 recombinant, which is the second-most prevalent subtype after B in Brazil, was found in MG (3 of 7), RJ (6 of 10), and SP (3 of 17). In contrast, the BF1 recombinant variants were not detected among blood donors in PE probably indicating that the HIV-1 epidemic among these donors is largely influenced by locally circulating variants.


