# HIV-1 Protease Mutations and Protease Inhibitor Cross-Resistance ^▿^ ^†^ ^‡^

Soo-Yon Rhee , ^1,^ ^\*^ Jonathan Taylor , ^2^ W. Jeffrey Fessel , ^3^
David Kaufman , ^4^ William Towner , ^5^ Paolo Troia , ^6^ Peter Ruane ,
^7^ James Hellinger , ^8^ Vivian Shirvani , ^9^ Andrew Zolopa , ^1^ and
Robert W. Shafer ^1^

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer


## Associated Data

Supplementary Materials

:



## Abstract

The effects of many protease inhibitor (PI)-selected mutations on the
susceptibility to individual PIs are unknown. We analyzed *in vitro*
susceptibility test results on 2,725 HIV-1 protease isolates. More than
2,400 isolates had been tested for susceptibility to fosamprenavir,
indinavir, nelfinavir, and saquinavir; 2,130 isolates had been tested
for susceptibility to lopinavir; 1,644 isolates had been tested for
susceptibility to atazanavir; 1,265 isolates had been tested for
susceptibility to tipranavir; and 642 isolates had been tested for
susceptibility to darunavir. We applied least-angle regression (LARS) to
the 200 most common mutations in the data set and identified a set of 46
mutations associated with decreased PI susceptibility of which 40 were
not polymorphic in the eight most common HIV-1 group M subtypes. We then
used least-squares regression to ascertain the relative contribution of
each of these 46 mutations. The median number of mutations associated
with decreased susceptibility to each PI was 28 (range, 19 to 32), and
the median number of mutations associated with increased susceptibility
to each PI was 2.5 (range, 1 to 8). Of the mutations with the greatest
effect on PI susceptibility, I84AV was associated with decreased
susceptibility to eight PIs; V32I, G48V, I54ALMSTV, V82F, and L90M were
associated with decreased susceptibility to six to seven PIs; I47A,
G48M, I50V, L76V, V82ST, and N88S were associated with decreased
susceptibility to four to five PIs; and D30N, I50L, and V82AL were
associated with decreased susceptibility to fewer than four PIs. This
study underscores the greater impact of nonpolymorphic mutations
compared with polymorphic mutations on decreased PI susceptibility and
provides a comprehensive quantitative assessment of the effects of
individual mutations on susceptibility to the eight clinically available
PIs.


##

HIV-1 protease inhibitors (PIs) are the mainstays of salvage therapy. As
the number of licensed PIs has increased, it has become important to
identify whether and how each PI-selected mutation affects
cross-resistance to each of the other PIs. In a previous study ( 41 ),
we previously applied several data mining approaches to assess
associations between HIV-1 protease genotype and phenotype test results
for the first-generation PIs: amprenavir (APV), the active component of
the prodrug fosamprenavir (FPV), atazanavir (ATV), indinavir (IDV),
lopinavir (LPV), nelfinavir (NFV), and saquinavir (SQV). Specifically,
we used a data set containing about 300 susceptibility results for ATV,
500 for LPV, and 800 for FPV, IDV, NFV, and SQV ( 41 ). We used a
predefined list of PI-selected mutations in this previous study to
reduce the number of independent variables influencing PI
susceptibility.

Here we analyze a data set that contains between 1,600 and 2,600
isolates tested for susceptibility to the first-generation PIs and about
600 and 1,200 isolates tested for susceptibility to darunavir (DRV) and
tipranavir (TPV), respectively. We use two regression methods in tandem:
one to identify genotypic predictors of decreased susceptibility and one
to quantify the impact of specific mutations on decreased PI
susceptibility. We then integrate our findings with previously published
data linking protease mutations to decreases in susceptibility to
specific PIs.



## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### HIV-1 isolates.

We analyzed HIV-1 isolates in the HIV Drug Resistance Database (HIVDB) (
40 ) for which cell-based *in vitro* PI susceptibility testing had been
performed by the PhenoSense (Monogram, South San Francisco, CA) ( 38 )
or Antivirogram (Virco, Mechelin, Belgium) ( 19 ) assays. Seventy
percent of the test results were obtained from published studies, and
30% were obtained from virus samples collected at Stanford University or
one of several collaborating clinics. Of the test results from published
studies, about one-half were obtained in clinical trials performed by
Boehringer Ingelheim ( 3 ), Tibotec ( 26 ), Gilead Sciences ( 30 ), and
Abbott Laboratories ( 23 ). The Stanford University Human Subjects
Committee approved this study.

Drug susceptibility results were expressed as the fold change in
susceptibility, defined as the ratio of the 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC ~50~ ) of the tested isolate to that of a standard wild-type control
isolate. We used the STAR method to assign an HIV-1 subtype to isolates
for which nucleotide sequences were available ( 32 ). We obtained
subtypes for the remaining isolates from the studies from which the
phenotype data were obtained or, for the collaborating clinics, from the
phenotype report. Mutations were defined as differences from the
consensus subtype B amino acid sequence (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/pages/documentPage/consensus_amino_acid_sequences.html
). Nonpolymorphic mutations were defined as mutations that occurred at a
prevalence of ≤0.5% in the eight most common HIV-1 subtypes ( 4 ).

To minimize bias that would result from overrepresenting highly similar
viruses, we excluded 200 redundant viruses---defined as viruses obtained
from the same person with the same mutations at the following PI
resistance positions: positions 30, 32, 46, 47, 54, 76, 82, 84, and 90 (
20 ). Because the presence of mixtures at influential drug resistance
positions may confound genotype-phenotype correlations, we excluded 472
viruses with sequences containing electrophoretic mixtures at these
protease positions.

### Identification of mutations associated with decreased PI susceptibility.

We used two independent regression analyses in tandem: least-angle
regression (LARS) was performed to identify protease mutations
associated with reduced susceptibility to at least one PI, and
least-squares regression was performed to quantify the contribution of
protease mutations to reduced PI susceptibility. Protease mutations for
which the mean regression coefficient determined by LARS was ≥0.5 or
≤−0.5 and more than 3 standard deviations above or below zero in 10
repeated runs of 5-fold cross-validation were considered significant
predictors. All of the significant predictors, including the ones that
were significant for only one PI, were retained for our second
regression analysis using least-squares regression.

LARS is a model selection algorithm for selecting a parsimonious set for
the efficient prediction of a response variable from a large collection
of possible explanatory variables ( 16 ). We applied LARS to the 200
most common mutations in our data set. Each of these mutations occurred
in 20 or more sequences in the data set, although some of these
mutations occurred in fewer than 20 sequences for TPV and DRV. Eight
regression models---one for each PI---were created. In these models,
each of the 200 mutations was an explanatory variable, and the log of
the fold change in susceptibility was the response variable. For each
5-fold cross-validation, 80% of data were used for learning regression
coefficients and 20% were used for testing. During learning regression
coefficients, LARS used four-fifths of the learning data for selecting a
model and one-fifth for validating the selected model using the LASSO
option. LARS constructs a model by first finding the mutation most
correlated with the log fold and then incrementally builds the model by
following the equiangular vector until another variable is equally
correlated with the residual. The validation set (the one-fifth of
learning data) is used to decide when to stop adding variables to the
model. The regularization parameter was chosen as the smallest parameter
whose mean cross-validation error was less than or equal to the minimum
cross-validation error plus 1 standard deviation of the LARS
cross-validation error at the minimum.

### Quantification of the contributions of protease mutations to decreased PI susceptibility.

In the least-squares regression analyses, the mutations identified by
LARS were explanatory variables and the log fold change in
susceptibility was the response variable. We used weighted least-squares
regression to minimize the potential influence of data obtained by two
different phenotypic methods. Weighting was performed by fitting the
complete data set (without cross-validation) and then calculating the
fitted mean-squared error (MSE ~fitted~ ) for each of the phenotypic
methods (Antivirogram and PhenoSense). We then weighted the contribution
of each sequence by 1/MSE ~fitted~ for each of the eight regression
models. For each weighted regression model, we performed 5-fold
cross-validation 10 times on different subdivisions of the complete data
set. During each 5-fold cross-validation, 80% of the data were used to
derive the coefficient of each genotypic predictor and 20% were used to
test the prediction performance of the model.

The mutations for which the mean regression coefficients from the 10
repeated runs of 5-fold cross-validation exceeded 3 standard deviations
above or below zero were considered statistically significant. Due to
the disparity in the numbers of genotype-phenotype results available for
each PI, we also required that the mean regression coefficient equal or
exceed 0.5 to be considered significantly associated with decreased
susceptibility to a specific PI. Without this additional criterion,
there would be more mutations associated with reduced susceptibilities
to older PIs simply because the greater numbers of available results for
these PIs would make even very weak associations appear significant. We
also standardized the mutation regression coefficients by dividing each
coefficient by the square root of the sum of squares of the residuals
obtained during the learning stages of each cycle of learning and
cross-validation. Standardizing the regression coefficients made it
possible to obtain unbiased comparisons of the magnitude of the
coefficient for a protease mutation across PIs.

Prediction performance was evaluated during cross-validation using
continuous and categorical approaches on 20% of the testing data set.
The continuous approach involved calculating the mean-squared error
between the actual and predicted log-fold (MSE) change in
susceptibility. The categorical approach involved determining how often
the predicted phenotype correlated with one of three predefined
categories of susceptibility that we refer to as susceptible,
low/intermediate, and high-level resistance. The predefined
susceptibility categories for each PI were derived in advance to
approximate the geometric mean of the published estimated clinical
cutoffs provided with the PhenoSense and VircoType reports (Table ​
(Table1 1 ).

### TABLE 1.

Phenotypic cutoffs used in this study to assess classification accuracy
compared with the clinical cutoffs reported by the Antivirogram and
PhenoSense assays

Drug ^*a*^

Antivirogram assay ^*b*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PhenoSense assay ^*c*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cutoffs for assessing classification accuracy in our analysis

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Low cutoff

High cutoff

Low cutoff

High cutoff

Low cutoff

High cutoff

ATV/r

2.5

32.5

NA

NA

3.0

15

DRV/r

10.0

106.9

10.0

90

10.0

90

FPV/r

1.5

19.5

4.0

11

3.0

15

IDV/r

2.3

27.2

NA

NA

3.0

15

LPV/r

6.1

51.2

9.0

55

9.0

55

NFV

2.2

9.4

NA

NA

3.0

6.0

SQV/r

3.1

22.6

2.3

12

3.0

15

TPV/r

1.5

7.0

2.0

8.0

2.0

8.0

Open in a separate window

^a^ Abbreviations: ATV, atazanavir; DRV, darunavir; FPV, fosamprenavir;
IDV, indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV,
tipranavir; /r, ritonavir boosting; cutoff, the fold change in
susceptibility defined as the ratio of the 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC ~50~ ) of the tested isolate to that of a standard wild-type control
isolate.

^b^ The low and high cutoffs provided with the VircoType assay
interpretation.

^c^ The PhenoSense assay provides a single cutoff for ATV/r (5.2-fold),
NFV (3.6-fold), and unboosted IDV (10-fold). NA, not available.

### Corroboration with other sources of published data.

We compared our findings on PI susceptibility with three sources of
published data: (i) previous publications showing that a protease
mutation was selected *in vitro* or *in vivo* with a specific PI or
directly decreased *in vitro* PI susceptibility in a well-characterized
set of virus samples or in a site-directed mutagenesis study; (ii) the
published genotypic susceptibility scores for darunavir and tipranavir
developed by Tibotec and Boeringer-Ingelheim, respectively ( 12 , 13 ,
25 ); and (iii) a linear regression analysis of genotypes and
Antivirogram phenotypes in the VircoLab database published in 2007 ( 46
). The VircoLab linear regression analysis generated a table with 39
mutations at 22 protease positions showing the estimated contribution of
each mutation to a decrease or increase in the fold change
susceptibility (referred to as fold change factor) of either 1 to 1.5,
1.5 to 2, or \>2. Associations in our analysis were considered to be
corroborated by the VircoLab analysis for protease mutations having the
highest possible fold change factor (\>2) for a PI.



## RESULTS

### Summary of PI susceptibility results.

*In vitro* drug susceptibility results were available for 2,725
isolates, including 2,643 from 2,439 individuals and 82 mutant
laboratory isolates. Fifty-six percent (1,525) of isolates had been
tested by the PhenoSense assay and 44% (1,200) by the Antivirogram
assay. Table ​ Table2 2 shows the number of isolates analyzed by each
assay for susceptibility to each of the eight PIs. More than 2,400
genotype-phenotype correlations were available for FPV, IDV, NFV, and
SQV. A total of 2,130 genotype-phenotype correlations were available for
LPV, 1,644 for ATV, 1,265 for TPV, and 642 for DRV. Fifty-five percent
of PhenoSense results were classified as susceptible, 18% were
classified as low-intermediate, and 27% were classified as high level
resistant. Comparable numbers for the Antivirogram assay were 41%
susceptible, 21% low-intermediate, and 38% high level resistant.
Ninety-two percent (2,500) of the isolates were categorized as subtype
B; 8% (225) were categorized as a non-B subtype.

### TABLE 2.

Total number of drug susceptibility results according to PI and
susceptibility assays

Drug ^*a*^

No. of isolates analyzed by the following assay:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total no. of isolates analyzed

Antivirogram

PhenoSense

ATV

744

900

1,644

DRV

277

365

642

FPV

1,054

1,416

2,470

IDV

1,130

1,450

2,580

LPV

973

1,157

2,130

NFV

1,153

1,488

2,641

SQV

1,159

1,457

2,616

TPV

684

581

1,265

Mean ^*b*^

897

1,102

1,999

Open in a separate window

^a^ Abbreviations: ATV, atazanavir; DRV, darunavir; FPV, fosamprenavir;
IDV, indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV,
tipranavir.

^b^ Mean number of phenotype results averaged over the eight PIs.

### Mutations identified by least-angle regression as predictive of PI resistance.

Among the 200 mutations that occurred 20 or more times in our data set,
LARS identified 46 mutations at 26 positions as statistically
significant predictors of decreased susceptibility to one or more PIs.
These mutations included L10FI, V11L, K20T, L24FI, D30N, V32I, L33F,
E35GN, K43T, M46IL, I47AV, G48MV, I50LV, F53L, I54ALMSTV, Q58E, G73CST,
T74PS, L76V, V82AFLST, N83D, I84AV, N88DS, L89V, and L90M. The median
number of mutations per sample was 4.0. Figure S1 in the supplemental
material shows the number of other mutations occurring with each
mutation. Table S1 in the supplemental material lists the number of
times each combination of mutations occurred in the data set.

Among the 46 significant mutations, 40 were nonpolymorphic mutations in
the eight most common subtypes. In contrast, only 14 of the 154
nonsignificant mutations were not polymorphic in these eight subtypes.
The nonpolymorphic significant mutations included L10I (which occurs in
1.8% to 9.3% of all subtypes), L33F (0.7% in subtype A and 1.4% in
subtype CRF01_AE), E35G (1.1% in subtype A, 1.2% in subtype G, and 2.4%
in subtype CRF02_AG), K43T (0.6% in subtype F), Q58E (0.9% in subtype
D), and T74S (0.6% to 8% in all subtypes except subtypes B and D) ( 40
).

The prevalence of each of the 46 mutations in the susceptibility data
set was highly correlated with the prevalence of these mutations in
sequences from more than 15,000 PI-treated individuals in the Stanford
HIV Drug Resistance Database ( *R* ^2^ = 0.87; *P* \< 0.001) ( 40 ) (see
Fig. S2 in the supplemental material).

### Least-squares regression prediction performance.

Table ​ Table3 3 summarizes the prediction performance of weighted
least-squares regression using the 46 mutations identified by LARS. The
MSE of 50 trials (5-fold cross-validation performed 10 times) per PI
ranged from 0.10 to 0.19, with standard deviation of 0.01 to 0.02 (Table
​(Table3). 3 ). For the PIs with the lowest MSE (FPV and LPV), the
predicted fold value was on average 10 ^0.10^ (1.3) times higher or
lower than the actual fold value. For the PI with the highest MSE (SQV),
the predicted fold value was on average 10 ^0.19^ (1.5) times higher or
lower than the actual fold value. The classification accuracy ranged
from 0.73 for TPV to 0.90 for NFV. In general, PIs with a low MSE had
high classification accuracy. However, this was not always the case. The
classification accuracy depended on the proportion of phenotypic results
that were close to the classification cutoffs and thus more prone to
misclassification. Table ​ Table3 3 also shows the prediction
performances using the results of each assay separately. With one
exception (PhenoSense LPV results), the performance of the weighted
least-squares regression was superior or equal to the results obtained
solely using one assay.

### TABLE 3.

Mean squared error (MSE) and classification accuracy of least-squares
regression (LSR) using PhenoSense and Antivirogram data sets separately
and in combination

Drug ^*a*^

Mean squared error ^*b*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Classification accuracy ^*b*^ ^,^ ^*c*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PhenoSense and LSR

Antivirogram and LSR

Combined, weighted LSR ^*d*^

PhenoSense and LSR

Antivirogram and LSR

Combined, weighted LSR ^*d*^

ATV

0.14 ± 0.01

0.14 ± 0.01

0.13 ± 0.01

0.83 ± 0.02

0.82 ± 0.02

0.83 ± 0.02

DRV

0.15 ± 0.03

0.14 ± 0.03

0.11 ± 0.02

0.85 ± 0.03

0.86 ± 0.03

0.87 ± 0.03

FPV

0.11 ± 0.01

0.11 ± 0.01

0.10 ± 0.01

0.82 ± 0.01

0.81 ± 0.02

0.82 ± 0.02

IDV

0.12 ± 0.01

0.12 ± 0.01

0.11 ± 0.01

0.81 ± 0.02

0.82 ± 0.02

0.82 ± 0.02

LPV

0.12 ± 0.01

0.11 ± 0.01

0.10 ± 0.01

0.78 ± 0.02

0.75 ± 0.02

0.77 ± 0.02

NFV

0.14 ± 0.01

0.14 ± 0.01

0.13 ± 0.01

0.89 ± 0.01

0.90 ± 0.01

0.90 ± 0.01

SQV

0.23 ± 0.02

0.21 ± 0.02

0.19 ± 0.02

0.82 ± 0.02

0.80 ± 0.02

0.82 ± 0.02

TPV

0.19 ± 0.02

0.15 ± 0.02

0.15 ± 0.02

0.69 ± 0.03

0.73 ± 0.02

0.73 ± 0.02

Avg

0.15

0.14

0.13

0.81

0.81

0.82

Open in a separate window

^a^ Abbreviations: ATV, atazanavir; DRV, darunavir; FPV, fosamprenavir;
IDV, indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV,
tipranavir.

^b^ The mean ± standard deviation (SD) values of 50 (10 times 5-fold
cross-validation) MSEs and classification accuracies by running a
least-squares regression (LSR) using the 41 genotypic predictors are
shown.

^c^ Classification accuracy is defined as the proportion of phenotypes
for which the predicted and actual results were concordant (susceptible
versus low-intermediate resistance versus high-level resistance).

^d^ LSR was performed separately for each genotype-phenotype data for
which the phenotype was determined by the PhenoSense assay or by the
Antivirogram assay. Weighted LSR was performed for the combined data
set.

Figure ​ Figure1 1 illustrates the classification accuracy for each PI.
It contains eight tables (also known as "confusion matrices") in which
each cell contains the mean proportion of results for which the actual
and predicted phenotypes were concordant in 10× 5-fold cross-validation.
The numbers shown beneath each table represent the mean number of
results in each test set (e.g., one-fifth the total number of
genotype-phenotype correlations for each PI). For example, the test sets
for ATV averaged 328.8 genotype-phenotype correlations of which 32% (sum
of values in the first row) were susceptible, 18.9% (sum of values in
the second row) were low-intermediate, and 49.1% (sum of values in the
third row) were high level resistant. Of the 328.8 genotype-phenotype
correlations, the weighted least-squares regression (LSR) model\'s
predictions were concordant with the actual results for 83.4% (the
values in the shaded diagonal cells); the predictions and actual results
were completely discordant for 0.3% (i.e., susceptible versus high level
resistant) and were partially discordant for 16.3% (i.e., intermediate
versus susceptible or intermediate versus high-level). The
classification accuracy shown in Table ​ Table3 3 was calculated as the
sum of the values in the shaded diagonal.

FIG. 1.

Confusion matrices of six PIs containing the number of folds according
to the classification of actual fold and the classification of predicted
fold. The *y* axis indicates the susceptible (Susc), intermediate-low
(Low-Inter), and high resistance (High) levels of the actual fold. The
*x* axis indicates the susceptible (Susc), intermediate-low (Low-Inter),
and high resistance (High) levels of the predicted fold. Each cell
contains the average number of folds belonging to corresponding
classifications of the actual and predicted fold from 50 test sets
(5-fold cross-validation 10 times). The average number of
genotype-phenotype correlations in 50 test sets for each drug is
indicated (n). The classification accuracy for each test was calculated
by the number of correctly predicted fold classification (which is the
sum of the diagonal cells) divided by the total number of folds (which
is the sum of all the cells). The average classification accuracy over
50 test sets is shown in Table ​ Table3. 3 . Drug abbreviations: ATV,
atazanavir; DRV, darunavir; FPV, fosamprenavir; IDV, indinavir; LPV,
lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV, tipranavir.

### Contributions of protease mutations to decreased PI susceptibility.

In the least-squares regression analysis, the 46 mutations at 26
positions had a regression coefficient of ≥0.5 for one or more PIs. The
median number of mutations associated with decreased susceptibility to
each PI was 28 (range, 19 to 32): 19 for DRV, 19 for TPV, 21 for SQV, 27
for FPV, 29 for NFV, 31 for LPV, 31 for IDV, and 32 for ATV. The median
number of mutations associated with increased susceptibility to each PI
was 2.5 (range, 1 to 8): one each for NFV, ATV, and IDV; two for FPV;
three for LPV; four for DRV; five for SQV; and eight for TPV. Figure ​
Figure2 2 shows the regression coefficients for each of the 46 mutations
with each of the PIs. Mutations with corroborative data supporting an
association with decreased susceptibility are indicated with red bars.
Table S2 in the supplemental material contains the mean regression
coefficients and the standard deviations for each of the 46 mutations
for each of the eight drugs.

FIG. 2.

Graphical representation of the regression coefficients of the weighted
least-squares regression (LSR) model for predicting changes in protease
inhibitor susceptibility using genotypic predictors. For each mutation,
the *y* axis indicates the magnitude of the mean coefficient of 50 LSR
runs (10 repetitions of 5-fold cross-validation), and the error bar
indicates the standard deviation from the mean. Positive coefficients
indicate mutations that decrease drug susceptibility. Negative
coefficients indicate mutations that increase drug susceptibility. The
*y* axis has no units because coefficients were normalized. The red bars
indicate mutations for which we identified corroborative data supporting
the association between the mutation and decreased PI susceptibility.
Drug abbreviations: ATV, atazanavir; DRV, darunavir; FPV, fosamprenavir;
IDV, indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV,
tipranavir.

Eleven of the 32 mutations associated with decreased ATV susceptibility
were previously reported to be selected by ATV *in vivo* or *in vitro*
or to decrease ATV susceptibility: V32I, M46L, G48V, I50L, I54V, G73ST,
I84AV, N88S, and L90M ( 5 , 6 , 18 , 28 , 31 , 45 , 51 ). Additionally,
L24I, G48M, F53L, I54AMST, G73C, V82S, and N88D had a fold change factor
of \>2 in the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ).

Ten of the 19 mutations associated with decreased DRV susceptibility
were previously reported to be selected *in vivo* by DRV or to decrease
the virological response to DRV salvage therapy: V32I, L33F, I47V, I50V,
I54LM, T74P, L76V, I84V, and L89V ( 11 , 13 ). Two additional mutations
(L10F and V82F) were shown to decrease DRV susceptibility ( 44 ).
Additionally, I84A had a fold change factor of \>2 in the VircoLab
analysis ( 46 ).

Fourteen of the 27 mutations associated with decreased FPV
susceptibility were previously reported to have been selected by APV *in
vivo* or *in vitro* or to decrease APV susceptibility: L10F, V32I, L33F,
M46IL, I47AV, I50V, I54LM, L76V, V82F, and I84AV ( 1 , 10 , 21 , 27 , 29
, 31 , 34 , 36 ). Additionally, I54ST had a fold change factor of \>2 in
the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ).

Fifteen of the 31 mutations associated with decreased IDV susceptibility
were previously reported to have been selected by IDV *in vivo* or *in
vitro* or to decrease IDV susceptibility: L10F, L24I, V32I, M46IL, I54V,
G73S, L76V, V82ATF, I84AV, N88S, and L90M ( 7 , 31 , 40 , 43 , 50 ).
Additionally, I47A, G48M, I54ATS, G73CT, and V82S had a fold change
factor of \>2 in the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ).

Nineteen of the 31 mutations associated with decreased LPV
susceptibility were previously reported to be selected by LPV *in vitro*
or *in vivo* or to decrease LPV susceptibility: L10F, L24I, V32I, L33F,
M46IL, I47AV I50V, I54LMV, L76V, V82AFST, and I84AV ( 10 , 14 , 17 , 21
, 23 , 31 , 34 , 35 ). Additionally, G48M, and I54AST had a fold change
factor of \>2 in the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ).

Fourteen of the 30 mutations associated with decreased NFV
susceptibility were previously reported to be selected by NFV *in vitro*
or *in vivo* or to decrease NFV susceptibility: L10FI, D30N, M46IL,
G48V, I54V, G73S, V82F, I84AV, N88DS, and L90M ( 2 , 31 , 37 , 49 , 50
). Additionally, L24I, V32I, I54AST, G73T, and V82S had a fold change
factor of \>2 in the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ).

Eight of the 21 mutations associated with decreased SQV susceptibility
were previously reported to be selected by SQV *in vitro* or *in vivo*
or to decrease SQV susceptibility: G48V, F53L, I54TV, G73S, I84AV, and
L90M ( 9 , 31 , 40 , 47 , 49 ). Additionally, G48M, I54AS, and G73T had
a fold change factor of \>2 in the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ).

Eleven of the 19 mutations associated with decreased TPV were previously
reported to be selected by TPV *in vitro* or *in vivo* or to decrease
the virological response to TPV salvage therapy (L33F, K43T, I47V,
I54AMV, T74P, V82LT, N83D, and I84V) ( 3 , 15 , 25 ).

### PI cross-resistance.

Of the mutations with a regression coefficient above 1.5, I84AV were
associated with decreased susceptibility to eight PIs; V32I, G48V,
I54ALMSTV, V82F, and L90M were associated with decreased susceptibility
to six or seven PIs; I47A, G48M, I50V, L76V, V82ST, and N88S were
associated with decreased susceptibility to four or five PIs; and D30N,
I50L, and V82AL were associated with decreased susceptibility to fewer
than four PIs.

At seven protease positions, positions 10, 47, 50, 54, 82, 84, and 88,
different mutations at the same position had markedly different effects
on PI susceptibility---defined here as a difference in regression
coefficients of \>1.0 for at least one PI. In some cases, one mutation
was associated with resistance to a PI, while a different amino acid
change at the same position was associated with increased susceptibility
to that PI. Conversely, mutations at six protease positions---positions
24, 35, 46, 48, 73, and 74---conferred similar effects on PI
susceptibility regardless of the specific amino acid change. At
positions 11, 20, 30, 32, 33, 43, 53, 58, 76, 89, and 90, only a single
mutation was associated with decreased PI susceptibility.

Figure ​ Figure3 3 shows the correlation between the regression
coefficients for each pair of PIs. The regression coefficients of the
mutations associated with decreased susceptibility to DRV and FPV ( *R*
^2^ = 0.73; *P* \< 0.001), IDV and LPV ( *R* ^2^ = 0.57; *P* \< 0.001),
and ATV and SQV ( *R* ^2^ = 0.53; *P* \< 0.001) were most strongly
correlated. The regression coefficients of the mutations associated with
decreased susceptibility to DRV and TPV had the lowest correlation ( *R*
^2^ = 0.01; not statistically significant).

FIG. 3.

Correlation between the regression coefficients for 46 protease
mutations for each pair of PIs. Each plot shows the regression
coefficient for the 46 protease mutations. The *x* axis indicates the
magnitude of regression coefficient of the PI denoted along the bottom
of the figure. The *y* axis indicates the magnitude of regression
coefficient of the PI denoted on the left side of the figure. The
correlation coefficient ( *R* ^2^ ) for the values of the 46 regression
coefficients between each pair of PIs is also shown on each plot. Drug
abbreviations: ATV, atazanavir; DRV, darunavir; FPV, fosamprenavir; IDV,
indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV, nelfinavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV,
tipranavir.



## DISCUSSION

We used two independent regression analyses to assess the contributions
of individual HIV-1 protease mutations to PI susceptibility. The first
regression analysis, LARS, employs a parsimonious feature selection
algorithm. It identified a set of 46 mutations significantly associated
with decreased PI susceptibility of which 40 were not polymorphic in the
eight most common group M subtypes. The second analysis relied on
least-squares regression to quantify the effects of these 46 mutations
on susceptibility to each of the PIs. We used LARS for the first
regression analysis because it is optimal for feature selection. We used
least-squares regression for the second analysis because the theoretical
basis for weighting data produced by different assays is established for
least-squares regression but not for LARS. In addition, the use of one
regression method for feature selection and another for model
optimization reduces the likelihood of overfitting the regression
coefficients.

This study differs in several ways from a study of genotype-phenotype
correlations we published in 2006 ( 41 ). First, the current study
includes nearly three times as much data for the first-generation PIs.
Second, the current study contains more than 600 genotype-phenotype
correlations for TPV and DRV---PIs that were not included in our
previous analysis. Third, the current study uses an unbiased feature
selection approach to identify genotypic predictors of resistance. In
contrast, our 2006 study used a predefined list of nonpolymorphic
treatment-selected mutations ( 39 ). Fifteen mutations in this study
were not significantly independently associated with decreased
susceptibility to one or more PIs in the 2006 study; these included
L10I, V11L, L24F, E35GN, I47A, G48M, I54AST, G73C, V82SL, N83D, and
I84A. L10I was not evaluated in the 2006 study because it did not
include mutations that were polymorphic in subtype B viruses. The
remaining additional mutations were not included in the 2006 study
because of their infrequent occurrence in that data set.

Despite the increase in the number of genotype-phenotype correlations in
this study over the 2006 study, predictions of fold decreased
susceptibility (mean-squared error) and classification accuracies for
the PIs ATV, FPV, IDV, LPV, NFV, and SQV were only slightly improved.
The classification accuracies increased on average from 0.81 to 0.83.
There are several likely explanations for what appears to be a plateau
in prediction accuracy despite an increasing number of
genotype-phenotype correlations. First, our analysis did not include
three types of mutations that influence PI susceptibility: (i) rare
mutations present too infrequently to be included in our regression
analysis, including several highly unusual mutations at known PI
resistance positions, such as G48AST, V82CM, and I84C ( 42 ); (ii)
common polymorphic mutations, which alone have little if any effect on
PI susceptibility but which influence susceptibility in combination with
other PI resistance mutations; and (iii) *gag* and *gag* cleavage site
mutations, which often have a significant effect on *in vitro* PI
susceptibility ( 8 , 24 , 33 ). Second, our analysis did not use
combinations of mutations (i.e., interaction terms) as predictors of
reduced susceptibility because the use of interaction terms and of more
complex models relating mutations to decreased susceptibility (e.g.,
neural networks or support vector machines) would have made it more
difficult to understand the contributions of individual mutations.

The mutations identified in our analysis were consistent with data from
other publications. An average of 13 mutations per PI had a regression
coefficient of ≥1.0; 88% of these associations were reported in other
publications. An average of 15 mutations per PI had a regression
coefficient between 0.5 and 1.0; 43% of these associations were reported
in other publications. The less frequent published support for mutations
with lower regression coefficients may reflect the lesser effect of
these mutations on decreased susceptibility and/or the lower frequency
of these mutations. Collinearity may also inflate or distort the
regression coefficients associated with some mutations. The most
striking example in this data set was L24F which occurred with L90M in
26 of 27 instances. Similarly, I54S or T occurred with V82A in 69 of 81
instances and with G48V in 65 of 81 instances. Because of their relative
infrequency and their linkage with other mutations, independent support
for I54S or T was present for six PIs only in the VircoLab regression
analysis ( 46 ).

Our analysis found that several mutations originally identified because
of their association with one PI were equally or more strongly
associated with a different PI. L76V, which was originally recognized
because of its association with decreased virological response to DRV (
11 , 13 ), was also strongly associated with decreased susceptibility to
FPV, IDV, and LPV. F53L, originally identified because of its
association with decreased virological response to LPV ( 22 , 23 ), was
more strongly associated with decreased susceptibility to ATV and SQV.
N83D, which was identified because of its association with decreased
virological response to TPV ( 25 ), was also associated with decreased
susceptibility to ATV, NFV, and SQV. L89V, which was identified because
of its association with decreased virological response to DRV ( 12 , 13
), was found to also be associated with decreased susceptibility to FPV.

In addition to identifying each of the previously reported associations
between the protease mutations L24I, I47A, I50L, I50V, I54L, L76V, and
N88S and increased PI susceptibility ( 21 , 25 , 48 , 50 ), our analysis
identified another eight mutations associated with increased PI
susceptibility, including L10F and G48MV for TPV, V82AST for DRV, and
V82FL for SQV. Two of these new associations, G48V increasing TPV
susceptibility and V82F increasing SQV susceptibility, were also
detected in the VircoLab analysis ( 46 ). PI "hypersusceptibility"
mutations provide insight into the mechanisms of PI activity. However,
the use of hypersusceptibility mutations to guide therapy has been
approached warily out of concern that the potential benefit of the PIs
made more active by these mutations would be negated by the emergence of
residual wild-type variants within a patient.

Two types of data other than genotype-phenotype associations contribute
to our understanding of the genetic basis for HIV-1 PI resistance: (i)
associations between protease mutations and selective PI pressure such
as occurs during *in vitro* passage experiments and in viruses from
PI-treated individuals; and (ii) associations between protease mutations
and the subsequent virological response to a PI-containing regimen.
However, with the increasing number of antiretroviral (ARV) treatment
options, fewer PI-containing salvage regimens are unsuccessful and fewer
virus sequences from PI-treated individuals are available. Therefore,
genotype-phenotype associations have become increasingly important for
unraveling the genetic basis of HIV-1 PI resistance.

In conclusion, this study is the first comprehensive quantitative
analysis of protease mutations associated with decreased susceptibility
to each of the eight licensed PIs. It is also the first analysis in
which previously published corroborative support for each
genotype-phenotype association is provided. Our analysis shows that the
protease mutations with the greatest impact on PI susceptibility are
those that are not polymorphic in the absence of PI therapy. Our
analysis also shows that protease mutations found in the course of
investigating resistance to one PI should be evaluated for their effects
on susceptibility to other PIs. Without such an evaluation, the extent
of cross-resistance among PIs will be underestimated.



## Supplementary Material

**\[Supplemental material\]**

Click here to view.



## Acknowledgments

S.-Y.R., J.T., and R.W.S. were supported in part by two NIH grants
(AI06858 and 5P01GM066524-08).



## Footnotes

^▿^ Published ahead of print on 26 July 2010.

^†^ Supplemental material for this article may be found at
http://aac.asm.org/ .

^‡^ The authors have paid a fee to allow immediate free access to this
article.



