# HIV-1 resistance patterns to integrase inhibitors in antiretroviral-experienced patients with virological failure on raltegravir-containing regimens

## Abstract

Background

Our aim was to study the *in vivo* viral genetic pathways for resistance
to raltegravir, in antiretroviral-experienced patients with virological
failure (VF) on raltegravir-containing regimens.

Methods

We set up a prospective study including antiretroviral-experienced
patients receiving raltegravir-based regimens. Integrase (IN) genotypic
resistance analysis was performed at baseline. IN was also sequenced at
follow-up points in the case of VF, i.e. plasma HIV-1 RNA > 400
copies/mL at month 3 and/or >50 copies/mL at month 6. For phenotyping,
the IN region was recombined with an IN-deleted HXB2-based HIV-1
backbone. A titrated amount of IN recombinant viruses was used for
antiviral testing against raltegravir and elvitegravir.

Results

Among 51 patients, 11 (21.6%) had VF. Four different patterns of IN
mutations were observed: (i) emergence of Q148H/R with secondary
mutations ( *n* = 5 patients); (ii) emergence of N155H, then replaced by
a pattern including Y143C/H/R ( *n* = 3); (iii) selection of S230N
(n = 1); and (iv) no evidence of selection of IN mutations ( *n* = 2).
The median raltegravir and elvitegravir fold changes (FCs) were 244
(154--647) and 793 (339--892), respectively, for the Q148H/R pattern,
while the median raltegravir and elvitegravir FCs were 21 (6--52) and 3
(2--3), respectively, with Y143C/H/R. The median plasma raltegravir *C*
~min~ was lower in patients with selection of the N155H mutation
followed by Y143C/H/R compared with patients with Q148H/R and with
patients without emerging mutations or without VF.

Conclusions

Diverse genetic profiles can be associated with VF on
raltegravir-containing regimens, including the dynamics of replacement
of mutational profiles. Pharmacokinetic parameters could be involved in
this genetic evolution.


## Methods

### Study population and design

The patients were selected from the ANRS Co3 Aquitaine Cohort, a
prospective hospital-based cohort of HIV-1-infected patients in
south-western France. Written informed consent was obtained for all
patients. The Aquitaine Cohort has an Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approval from the Bordeaux University IRB.

The patients originated from a cohort of 51 antiretroviral-experienced
patients treated by raltegravir-containing ART in the setting of an
expanded access programme in France. ^\ \ 13^ The dosage of raltegravir
was 400 mg twice daily. The co-prescribed antiretroviral drugs were
chosen on the basis of a baseline genotypic resistance analysis. The
patients were followed-up at months 0, 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 on
raltegravir-containing ART, at which times plasma HIV-1 RNA (CobasTaqman
HIV assay, Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland) and CD4+ T cell counts
were measured. Eleven patients who had virological failure (VF; defined
as plasma HIV-1 RNA \> 400 copies/mL after 3 months on raltegravir
and/or \>50 copies/mL after 6 months on raltegravir) were included in
this study.

### Genotypic resistance analysis

Reverse transcriptase, protease, and *env* gp41 for patients having
received enfuvirtide, were submitted for genotypic resistance analysis
according to the ANRS consensus procedures available at
www.hivfrenchresistance.org . The genotypic sensitivity score (GSS) was
calculated as the sum of genotypic sensitivities \[according to the ANRS
genotype-interpretation algorithm, version 17 (
http//:www.hivfrenchresistance.org ); 0, 0.5 or 1 if resistant,
partially susceptible or susceptible, respectively\] to the drugs
co-prescribed with raltegravir. Enfuvirtide prescribed in
enfuvirtide-naive patients was considered as an active drug.

### Amplification and sequencing of the HIV-1 integrase gene

The complete integrase gene was PCR-amplified from plasma samples
collected at baseline and at the time of VF. Plasma (1 mL) was
centrifuged at 19 000 **g** for 1 h at 4°C, and viral RNA was extracted
from the pellet using the High Pure Viral RNA Kit (Roche Diagnostics). A
10 µL aliquot of RNA was used for RT--PCR (Titan one-Tube RT-PCR kit,
Roche Diagnostics) using primers IN12 and IN13. A nested PCR was then
performed by using Ampli Taq Gold DNA Polymerase (Applied Biosystems)
with primers IN and BH4.

After purification of the amplified DNA (S400 columns, Pharmacia), the
integrase gene was sequenced by using two forward (IN1 and IN4542S) and
two reverse (IN4764AS and BH4) primers. The complete PCR protocols,
sequencing procedures and primer sequences are described at
www.hivfrenchresistance.org . The sequence analysis was processed on a
Beckmann CEQ 2000 XL Sequencer and the sequences were aligned with the
HXB2 reference sequence. We reported the following 47 mutations present
at 31 positions previously associated with *in vitro* or *in vivo*
resistance to HIV-1 INIs: ^\ \ 14^ H51Y; T66I/A/K; V72I; L74I/A/M; E92Q;
T97A; T112I; F121Y; T125K; A128T; E138K/A/D; G140R/C/H; Q146K/P; S147G;
Q148K/R/H; V151I; S153Y/A; M154I; N155S/H; K156N; E157Q; K160D/N;
G163R/K; V165I; V201I; I203M; T206S; S230N/R; V249I; R263K; and C280Y.

### Determination of plasma raltegravir concentrations

Blood samples were drawn to determine plasma raltegravir concentrations
at the pharmacokinetic steady state 1 month after starting raltegravir
as well as at months 3 and 6. Minimum ( *C* ~min~ ) serum drug
concentrations, corresponding to ∼12 h after raltegravir ingestion, were
measured using a validated HPLC with mass spectrometry detection
(LC-MS). ^\ \ 15^

### Phenotypic sensitivity to raltegravir and elvitegravir

#### Viral RNA extraction

Viral RNA was isolated, starting either from 256 µL of plasma using the
automated QIAamp Virus BioRobot MDx extraction platform (Qiagen), or
from 600 µL of plasma using the EasyMAG procedure (BioMérieux) following
the manufacturers' instructions.

#### Amplification of the HIV-1 integrase gene

Starting from viral RNA, cDNA was generated using the Accuscript High
Fidelity Reverse Transcriptase (Stratagene) with random hexamers. cDNA
synthesis consisted of three steps: 10 min at 25°C; 60 min at 42°C; and
15 min at 70°C. Subsequently, the integrase gene was amplified by nested
PCR using forward primers 5′INoutR1 (positions 4059--4081 in HXB2) and
5′INinF1 (positions 4143--4164 in HXB2) and reverse primers 3′INoutR2
(positions 5241--5262 in HXB2) and 3′INinR1 (positions 5195--5217 in
HXB2). Both the outer and inner PCRs were performed using the Phusion
High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (Finnzymes). Thermal cycling of both PCRs
consisted of a denaturation step at 98°C for 30 s, 30 cycles of 10 s at
98°C, 30 s at 58°C and 30 s at 72°C, and a final elongation for 10 min
at 72°C.

#### Production of replication-competent recombinant viruses

An HXB2-based HIV backbone in which the integrase region was deleted
(pHXB2-ΔIN) was used, essentially as previously described. ^\ \ 16^
Integrase amplicons were then recombined intracellularly with the
pHXB2-ΔIN backbone by Amaxa nucleofection (Amaxa Biosystems) following
the manufacturer\'s recommendations. The cytopathic effect (CPE) was
monitored during the course of infection. When full CPE was reached,
recombinant viruses were harvested by centrifugation.

#### Drug susceptibility testing of recombinant viruses

Replication-competent recombinant viruses were titrated and subjected to antiviral testing in MT4-LTR-eGFP cells using raltegravir and elvitegravir at concentrations from 0.1 nM to 3.6 µM and from 0.04 nM to 0.7 µM, respectively. After 3 days of incubation at 37°C and 5% CO ~2~ , infection was quantified by means of UV microscopy measuring the HIV Tat-induced eGFP expression. Using the IIIB HIV-1 wild-type virus as a reference, fold change (FC) values were calculated.


## Results

### Baseline characteristics and follow-up

The baseline characteristics of the 11 patients with VF on raltegravir,
and the co-prescribed drugs within the optimized regimen, are described
in Table 1 . The median baseline viral load was 5.4 log ~10~ copies/mL
(range: 2.5--6.7) and the median CD4 cell count was 36 cells/mm ^3^
(range: 7--300). The median GSS was 1 (range: 0--3). All HIV-1 strains
belonged to HIV-1 subtype B, except for patient 4 who was infected with
an HIV-1 subtype G strain.


The evolution of plasma HIV-1 RNA on raltegravir in the 11 patients is
shown in Figure 1 . Three patients (patients 1, 2 and 11) had an initial
viral load drop followed by a rebound to the baseline level; five
patients had no (3, 4 and 5) or only a limited (6, 7 and 8) decrease in
viral load; two patients (9 and 10) had a suboptimal inhibition of viral
replication at month 3 or month 6. The median decrease in CD4+ T cell
count during a 1 year follow-up on raltegravir was −9 cells/mm ^3^
(range: −179 to +359).

Figure 1

Virological evolution and different patterns of integrase mutations in
11 patients with virological failure on raltegravir-containing therapy.
Time of follow-up is expressed in months (M0--M12). Baseline integrase
polymorphisms appear at month 0. Additional mutations selected during
follow-up are preceded by (+). In patients 6, 7 and 8 the mutation N155H
is then replaced by a different pattern. VL, viral load (plasma HIV-1
RNA); RAL, raltegravir; 3TC, lamivudine; TDF, tenofovir
diphosphofumarate; ETR, etravirine; ddI, didanosine; DRV/r, darunavir
boosted with ritonavir; ENF, enfuvirtide; FTC, emtricitabine.

Open in new tab Download slide

### Selection of INI resistance mutations

The selection of INI resistance mutations by a raltegravir-containing
regimen is shown in Figure 1 and in more detail in Table 2 . The
integrase sequences were determined at baseline (D0) before prescription
of raltegravir. Several polymorphic mutations previously related to
increased levels of resistance to INI in the presence of primary
mutations were present at day 0; V72I was present in seven patients,
V201 in five patients, T206S in two patients, V151I in two patients and
I203M in one patient. The median number of baseline mutations was 1
(range: 0--3).


Four different genotypic patterns could be characterized when we studied
the selection of INI resistance mutations on raltegravir-containing
regimens: (i) in five patients, selection of the Q148H/R mutations with
co-selection or accumulation of other mutations (G140S/A in five
patients, L74M in two patients, and E138A and K156N in one patient);
(ii) in three patients, selection of the N155H mutation followed by its
disappearance and replacement by a pattern comprising the Y143H/R/C
mutations with other mutations (T97A in three patients, L74M in two
patients, and G163R and S230R in one patient; raltegravir was
specifically stopped between months 6 and 12 in patient 6, with
disappearance of the selected mutations); (iii) in one patient with
suboptimal response the mutation S230N was shown to have been selected
at month 3; and (iv) in two patients no selection of integrase mutations
could be evidenced (patients 10 and 11).

Using this limited dataset, no association could be found between the
presence of baseline integrase polymorphisms and the selection of either
the Q148H/R pathway or the N155H followed by Y143C/H/R pathways.

### Plasma raltegravir concentrations

The median raltegravir *C* ~min~ was 250 ng/mL \[interquartile range
(IQR): 150--350\], 300 ng/mL (IQR: 200--350) and 290 ng/mL (IQR:
150--350) at month 1, 3 and 6, respectively. The median plasma
raltegravir *C* ~min~ was lower in patients with the selection of the
N155H mutation followed by Y143C/H/R compared with the patients with the
Q148H/R mutation and with the patients without emerging mutations or
with virological response; this difference was statistically significant
at month 3 and 6 (Table 3 ).


### Phenotypic sensitivity to raltegravir and elvitegravir

The FC values to raltegravir and elvitegravir are shown in Table 2 . The median baseline raltegravir FC was 0.91 (range: 0.69--2.18) and the median baseline elvitegravir FC was 0.94 (range: 0.6--2.12). In samples with the Q148H/R mutations, the median raltegravir FC was 326.48 (range: 154.46--908.45) and the median elvitegravir FC was 847.95 (range: 339.94--640). The two samples with the N155H mutation had low raltegravir FCs (1.07 and 1.72) and low elvitegravir FCs (2.1 and 6.05). In samples with the Y143C/H/R mutations, the median baseline raltegravir FC was 24.83 (range: 5.87-51.95) and the median baseline elvitegravir FC was 3 (range: 1.56--9.57). No phenotypic result could be obtained for the sample with the S230N mutation, because of low viral load.


## Discussion

We characterized the genotypic evolution of HIV-1 integrase in patients
with VF on raltegravir. These patients represented 11/51 (22%)
antiretroviral-experienced patients who had received raltegravir
together with an optimized background therapy. Undetectable viral loads
were obtained in 78% of patients, similar to previously reported rates
of virological response in clinical trials of raltegravir in
antiretroviral-experienced patients. ^\ \ 7\ ,\ \ \ 8^ HIV-1 integrase
resistance mutations were selected in 9/11 (81%) patients, with two main
pathways. As previously reported, ^\ \ 9^ the most frequent pathway
involved the Q148H/R mutations associated with the G140S/A mutations.
The Q148H/R mutations have been reported to be associated with high
levels of phenotypic resistance to raltegravir. ^\ \ 17^ The G140S
mutation has been recently shown to rescue the catalytic defect due to
the Q148H mutation, enabling the recovery of the viral fitness. ^\ \ 18^
We confirmed the high level of phenotypic resistance to raltegravir in
five patients with the Q148H/R pathway which was associated with high
levels of plasma viral loads.

The second resistance pathway was detected in three patients and
corresponded first to the selection of the N155H mutation, subsequently
replaced by a pattern involving the Y143R/C/H and T97A mutations
associated with L74M, G163R or S230R. The mutation N155H had been
previously detected as an alternative pathway of resistance to
raltegravir, ^\ \ 9^ whereas the Y143R/C/H mutations had been rarely
found in patients failing on raltegravir. ^\ \ 19^ The replacement of
N155H by Y143R/C/H suggested an advantage for replication of this latter
pattern. A marked decrease in phenotypic sensitivity to raltegravir was
observed for the isolates harbouring the Y143R/C/H mutations; in
contrast, little phenotypic resistance to raltegravir was noted in the
presence of N155H; however, the low FC could in this case be due to the
presence of wild-type virus in the global population because N155N/H was
detected in a population mixture by sequencing. We can thus speculate
that the increase of resistance to raltegravir with the Y143R/C/H
mutation might have led to the selection of these mutations and to the
disappearance of N155H. Another explanation could be that the viral
evolution was driven by the disadvantage in replicative capacity
conferred by the N155H mutation. ^\ \ 17^ The emergence of different
integrase mutation patterns in patients failing raltegravir could be
influenced by various factors. Interestingly, the plasma raltegravir *C*
~min~ was lower in patients with the selection of the N155H mutation
followed by Y143C/H/R compared with patients with the Q148H/R mutation
and with patients without emerging mutations or with virological
response. This finding has to be taken together with the measurement of
lower phenotypic FCs with N155H or Y143C/H/R than with Q148H/R. It
suggests that in the presence of low raltegravir plasma levels the
155/143 pathways could be advantaged whereas higher but still suboptimal
raltegravir plasma levels could promote the high-level resistance
pathway encoded by Q148H/R + G140S/A. Even if we have to be cautious due
to the small numbers of resistant isolates included in this comparison,
we think that this finding is of clinical importance since it suggests
that a suboptimal adherence to raltegravir-based therapy could have a
high cost with regard to the selection of resistant viruses. The two
latter patients failed therapy without emerging integrase mutations
although raltegravir exposure appeared sufficient; this could be due to
ongoing viral replication in viral reservoirs where inhibitory
raltegravir concentrations could not be reached.

Another factor which could explain the selection of different
raltegravir resistance pathways is the baseline variability of the
integrase gene. However, we could not find any association in our
patients between the presence of polymorphic substitutions at baseline
and the subsequent selection of the different patterns. Further studies
including a larger number of patients will be needed to determine
precisely both the pharmacokinetic and virological factors influencing
the raltegravir resistance pathways.

Our study also provides interesting data concerning the sensitivity to
elvitegravir of raltegravir-resistant isolates. Differences in
susceptibility to elvitegravir were noted according to the different
patterns of raltegravir resistance mutations. High-level resistance to
elvitegravir was shown in the presence of the Q148H/R pathway. N155H was
associated with low-level resistance to elvitegravir in our study, which
could be due to the presence of a mixture of population N155N/H. This,
however, confirms data obtained with site-directed mutants ^\ \ 12^
showing a large reduction in susceptibility to elvitegravir in the
presence of Q148R but substantially lower levels of resistance to
elvitegravir with N155H. The isolates with the Y143C/H/R mutations
showed little phenotypic resistance to elvitegravir in our patients.
This seems to be in accordance with recent findings ^\ \ 20^ showing
frequent selection of T66I/A/K, E92Q, Q148H/R/K and N155H but not of
Q143C/H/R in patients with VF on elvitegravir.

Although different levels of cross-resistance to elvitegravir are
encoded by the different raltegravir resistance mutations, future
generations of INIs will probably need to act through a different
mechanism and/or interact with other portions of the integrase enzyme in
order to benefit raltegravir-failing patients. It could, however, be of
importance to prevent the continuous selection of new raltegravir
resistance mutations or pathways in patients with VF on raltegravir in
order to preserve future options with next-generation INIs. We report in
our study the selective withdrawal of raltegravir in one patient with
the mutation Y143C, with no significant increase in HIV-1 replication.
Similar findings were observed in a recent study on four individuals
with either N155H or Q148H, selectively stopping raltegravir, ^\ \ 21^
suggesting limited residual activity of raltegravir in these patients.
However, we should be cautious in interpreting data on limited numbers
of patients. The disappearance of the Y143C mutation from the plasma
sample following the withdrawal of raltegravir is likely to indicate a
disadvantage in viral fitness conferred by this mutation.

In conclusion, we characterized the dynamics of the different integrase
genotypic patterns in patients failing on raltegravir-containing
regimens. Pharmacokinetic and virological parameters should be further
assessed in larger studies in order to confirm their role as
determinants of the genotypic pathways of resistance to raltegravir. A
precise understanding of the *in vivo* and *in vitro* mechanisms of
resistance to raltegravir will be of interest to preserve future options
with next-generation INIs.

