#  Primary mutations selected *in vitro* with raltegravir confer large fold changes in susceptibility to first-generation integrase inhibitors, but minor fold changes to inhibitors with second-generation resistance profiles

## Abstract

Emergence of resistance to raltegravir reduces its treatment efficacy in
HIV-1-infected patients. To delineate the effect of resistance mutations
on viral susceptibility to integrase inhibitors, *in vitro* resistance
selections with raltegravir and with MK-2048, an integrase inhibitor
with a second-generation-like resistance profile, were performed.
Mutation Q148R arose in four out of six raltegravir-selected resistant
viruses. In addition, mutations Q148K and N155H were selected. In the
same time frame, no mutations were selected with MK-2048. Q148H/K/R and
N155H conferred resistance to raltegravir, but only minor changes in
susceptibility to MK-2048. V54I, a previously unreported mutation,
selected with raltegravir, was identified as a possible compensation
mutation. Mechanisms by which N155H, Q148H/K/R, Y143R and E92Q confer
resistance are proposed based on a structural model of integrase. These
data improve the understanding of resistance against raltegravir and
cross-resistance to MK-2048 and other integrase inhibitors, which will
aid in the discovery of second-generation integrase inhibitors.

## Results

### Selection of HIV-1 strains resistant to RAL

A parallel IVRS methodology in 96-well plates ( Goethals et al., 2008 ) was used to select six strains with reduced susceptibility to RAL. The drug-resistant strains were selected by serial passage of HIV-1 IIIB in the presence of increasing concentrations of RAL. When the viruses were propagated at a final concentration of 6 µM, a concentration 600 times higher than the EC ~50~ of RAL, viruses were genotyped to identify mutations. One selected strain required 19 passages to accumulate mutations enabling replication in the presence of 6 µM RAL, where other strains required 33, 38, 43 or 51 passages.

Six parallel IVRS experiments elucidating different resistance pathways (Table 1) were performed. Viruses with primary mutations Q148R, Q148K or N155H were selected. Four out of six viruses selected the Q148R mutation. A new mutation V54I was selected as an additional mutation in a virus containing the Q148R mutation.

In parallel with RAL, viruses were propagated in the presence of increasing concentrations of MK-2048 or Cmpd G ( Table 2 ). After 41 passages, one virus was selected with 1.6 µM of MK-2048 and one with 1 µM of Cmpd G. Although both viruses were propagated at a concentration 500 times higher than the EC~50~ of their respective selecting compound, no mutations could be selected. Only a mixture of a mutant and wildtype, i.e. G140E/G in virus 7, was observed which was selected with 1.5 µM MK-2048.

### Phenotypic (cross)-resistance of the RAL-selected HIV-1 strains to a panel of INIs

All six RAL-selected HIV-1 strains were re-cultured and the antiviral
activity of RAL was determined. In parallel, the susceptibility of the
selected HIV strains to a panel of INIs, namely EVG, PACA, L-870,810,
PICA and two INIs with a second-generation resistance profile, MK-2048
and Cmpd G, was determined to establish the degree of cross-resistance (
Fig. 1 ). The re-cultured viruses were genotyped to confirm that
mutations had been preserved throughout the re-culturing process (
Table 1 ). All primary mutations were maintained in the six selected
viruses after reculture, except in virus 6, were the Q148R mutation
reverted to a mixture Q148Q/R.

In comparison with wild-type virus, viruses 1 to 5 showed large
reductions in susceptibility to RAL, EVG, PACA and L-870,810
(\> 240-fold) ( Fig. 1 ). Virus 6 (E138E/K Q148Q/R) was more susceptible
to RAL, EVG, PACA and L-870,810 (susceptibility reduction between 11-
and 65-fold) than viruses 1 to 5. Viruses 1 and 2, two viruses harboring
the primary mutation Q148R and additional mutations G140A, E138K or
V54I, showed greatly reduced susceptibility to MK-2048 (370- and
140-fold, respectively), with more moderate reductions in susceptibility
to Cmpd G (85- and 25-fold, respectively). Virus 1 differs from virus 2
by only one extra mutation V54I, but confers a higher reduction in
susceptibility to all INIs than virus 2, except to PACA, were a similar
reduction was observed. Virus 3 (E138K G140A Q148K S230R), virus 4 (L63I
L74M A128T E138K Q148R V151I), and virus 5 (L74M E92Q V151I N155H E157Q)
were 50 to 70-fold less susceptible to MK-2048 and 5- to 15-fold to Cmpd
G. Virus 6 (E138E/K Q148Q/R) displayed wild-type susceptibility to
MK-2048 and Cmpd G. Viruses 1 to 5 conferred a 30-fold reduction in
susceptibility to PICA, where virus 6 showed only 6-fold reduction in
susceptibility to PICA ( Fig. 1 ).

### Effect of the site-directed mutants on the susceptibility of HIV-1 (HXB2D) to different INIs

Mutations selected in this study and reported in previous studies from
this lab and others, including clinical data ( Cooper et al., 2008 ,
McColl et al., 2007 ), were incorporated in a wild-type HIV-1 backbone
(HXB2D) by site-directed mutagenesis, and susceptibility of the
resulting viruses to each INI was determined ( Fig. 2 ). Specifically,
the Q148R, the Q148K and the N155H mutation, all with their additional
mutations selected during IVRS experiments, and the clinically observed
mutations N155S, T66I, Q148H, G140S, and Y143C were included.
Twenty-three combinations of single, double, triple or quadruple
mutations were tested for susceptibility to RAL and to other INIs (
Fig. 2 ). AZT, which was used as a control antiviral, showed EC ~50~
values for the IN mutants that was consistent with the EC ~50~ for
wild-type virus, indicating full susceptibility to the reverse
transcriptase inhibitor.

Small reductions (\< 6-fold) in virus susceptibility to EVG, RAL, or any
other INI used in this study was observed when the impact of a singular
V54I, L74M, A128T, E138K, G140A/S, V151I, E157Q or S230R mutation was
tested ( Fig. 2 A). The mutations G140A/S and E138K have been previously
observed accompanying one of the primary resistance mutations Q148K/H/R
and are considered as secondary mutations ( Nakahara et al., 2009 ).

The T66I mutation, while conferring 25-fold reduced susceptibility to
EVG, caused only 1- to 6-fold reduction in susceptibility to the other
INIs ( Fig. 2 A). Y143C, a resistance associated mutation (RAM) of RAL (
Cooper et al., 2008 ), conferred a 4-fold reduction in susceptibility to
RAL, but did not reduce susceptibility to the other tested INIs
(\< 3-fold). The single mutations E92Q, N155H/S and Q148K/R, which are
considered as RAMs of RAL or EVG ( Cooper et al., 2008 , McColl et al.,
2007 ), conferred low to moderately reduced susceptibility to RAL and
PICA (\< 14-fold) but moderately to highly reduced susceptibility to
EVG, PACA and L-870,810 (6- to 90-fold). Q148H confers a 6-fold
reduction in susceptibility to RAL and a 5-fold reduction to L-870,810
and PACA, but wildtype susceptibility to the other INIs. The mutations
Q148R and E92Q showed wild-type susceptibility to MK-2048 and Cmpd G,
while the mutation N155H conferred 6- and 4-fold reduced susceptibility
to respectively MK-2048 and Cmpd G ( Fig. 2 A).

Compared with the effect of Q148R and G140A on their own, combining both
mutations in a common backbone resulted in a large decrease in
susceptibility (7- to 564-fold) to the INI panel ( Fig. 2 B). The triple
mutant Q148R/G140A/E138K conferred similar reductions in susceptibility
as the double mutant Q148R/G140A to most of the members of the INI
panel, but led to a decreased susceptibility to Cmpd G. The mutation
V54I had no additional effect on virus susceptibility to the tested
INIs, when added to the triple mutant Q148R/G140A/E138K.

The mutation Q148H on its own conferred between 1- and 6-fold decreases
in susceptibility to the panel of INIs, while addition of the G140S
mutation led to a further decrease in susceptibility between 3- and
1750-fold ( Fig. 2 C). Again, the mutation E138K had no additional
effect on HIV-susceptibility to the tested INIs.

The mutation Q148K conferred reduced susceptibility to all tested INIs
(6- to 90-fold). G140S or G140S/E138K, in combination with Q148K, had no
or only limited additional effect on the susceptibility to most INIs (
Fig. 2 D). The double (Q148K/G140S) and triple mutant virus
(Q148K/G140S/E138K) did not confer reduced susceptibility to MK-2048 and
Cmpd G.

### Replication kinetics of mutant HIV-1 viruses

To investigate the effect of the drug-induced mutations of virus 1
(Q148R/G140A/E138K/V54I) on viral replication, the corresponding
recombinant viruses were examined for their ability to replicate in MT4
cells ( Fig. 3 ). The recombinant virus with the single Q148R mutation
showed a small reduction in p24 production relative to the replication
of the wild-type HIV-1 HXB2D. Introducing the G140A on top of Q148R,
resulted in even lower replication rate. Introducing E138K partly
recovered this reduced replication efficiency of the Q148R/G140A virus.
Addition of the V54I mutation to the virus with the mutations Q148R,
G140A and E138K, resulted in a replication capacity comparable with
wildtype HXB2D virus.

### Three-dimensional docking model of HIV-1 IN with RAL

RAL was docked into the model of Chen et al. (2008) and it adopted a
binding mode, common to other potent inhibitors, sharing four key
elements ( Fig. 4 ):

-    1)

The inhibitor-binding site exists only upon 3′-processing of viral
DNA, removing a GT dinucleotide;

-    2)

The hydrophobic tail (benzyl moiety) binds in a putative hydrophobic
pocket formed mostly by the flexible active-site loop (site 1);

-    3)

The polar moiety chelates only the Mg ^2+^ coordinated by D116 and
E152 (site 2), the other Mg ^2+^ is shielded by IN and viral DNA and
therefore not accessible by the INI;

-    4)

A polar interaction between the inhibitor and a triad motif
consisting of C65, H67 and E92 (site 3).

The residues, associated with resistance to RAL, i.e., E92, Y143, Q148
and N155 were highlighted in the model. All residues clustered proximal
to the catalytic triad represented by the DDE-motif of IN. Q148 and Y143
are located in the flexible loop (site 1), where the benzyl moiety of
RAL is situated. The glutamic acid at position 92 is located at site 3.

::: section

## Discussion

Here we report the results from IVRS studies with RAL and the effects of
selected mutations on the virus susceptibility to RAL and on
cross-resistance to other first-generation INIs and to the
second-generation INIs MK-2048 and Cmpd G. In parallel with the RAL IVRS
studies, resistance selection was performed with MK-2048 and Cmpd G.

RAL failure is associated with IN mutations in at least three distinct
genetic pathways defined by two or more mutations including a signature
mutation at Q148H/K/R, N155H, or Y143R/H/C, and one or more additional
minor mutations ( Cooper et al., 2008 , Johnson et al., 2008 ). The
existence of several INI resistance pathways is similar to what has been
described for other antiretroviral classes, such as nucleoside-, and
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors or protease inhibitors (
Clavel and Hance, 2004 ). However, the determinants of the evolution
toward these different profiles are unknown. They could be related to
different factors such as naturally occurring polymorphisms in IN (
Lataillade et al., 2007 ), pharmacokinetic factors such as RAL trough
levels ( Winslow et al., 1996 ), or sequences of other proteins like
reverse transcriptase, which may interact with IN ( Wu et al., 1999 ,
Zhu et al., 2004 ).

Here, distinct resistance pathways were selected with RAL, i.e. the
Q148R, the Q148K and the N155H pathways. Some mutations may develop less
readily than others, for example, the substitution Y143R requires at
least two nucleotide changes (TAC to CGC), while the substitution Q148R
(CAA/G to CGA/G) requires only one nucleotide change. This might explain
why Y143R was not selected. Although different mutations were selected
with RAL, no mutations were selected with MK-2048 or Cmpd G during the
same time frame, suggesting a potentially higher genetic barrier to
resistance development and possible second-generation resistance
profiles of the two investigational compounds MK-2048 and Cmpd G.

When testing the RAL-selected viruses for susceptibility to a panel of
INIs, high-level cross-resistance between RAL, EVG, PACA and L-870,810
was observed. The similarity between the pharmacophores of these
compounds suggests a similar binding mode, which might explain the
similar changes in virus susceptibility to those compounds. Less
cross-resistance was observed between RAL and MK-2048, Cmpd G, or PICA,
where PICA has a different pharmacophore compared with RAL. The
pharmacophore of PICA is a pyrido hydroxamic acid moiety, while the
pharmacophore of RAL is a diketo amide. It is expected that both
pharmacophores share a similar binding mode at the catalytic triad,
albeit with small differences in their geometry. This variability in
both pharmacophores may explain the difference in susceptibility and the
difference in potency of the compounds. But although the change in
susceptibility compared with wild type of the most heavily mutated
viruses was several times lower for PICA than for RAL, the lower potency
and higher toxicity of PICA likely precluded its further development.
Less cross-resistance was also seen between RAL and MK-2048 or Cmpd G in
line with previous observations ( Vacca et al., 2007 , Wai et al., 2007
), highlighting their potential as second-generation INIs.

For the first time, V54I is reported as a mutation selected by RAL *in
vitro* . Comparison of the two RAL-selected viruses, virus 1 (Q148R
G140A E138K V54I) and virus 2 (Q148R G140A E138K), differing from each
other only by the mutation V54I, showed that virus 1 conferred a
slightly higher reduction in susceptibility to all INIs, except PACA,
compared with virus 2, which does not harbor V54I.

To test the individual or the combined effect of the selected mutations
on viral susceptibility to the INI panel, single, double, triple and
quadruple mutations were constructed in a wild-type HIV-1 backbone via
site-directed mutagenesis. In addition, the mutations N155S, T66I,
Q148H, G140S, Y143C selected by RAL ( Cooper et al., 2008 ) or EVG (
McColl et al., 2007 ) in the clinic, were included in the analysis.

The IN mutation T66I, previously identified as a resistance-associated
mutation of EVG ( Goethals et al., 2008 ), has also been selected *in
vitro* with S-1360 ( Fikkert et al., 2004 ), L-708,906 ( Fikkert et al.,
2003 ) and L-731,988 ( Hazuda et al., 2000 ), but is not considered as a
resistance mutation of RAL, as confirmed in our study.

E92Q has been previously selected with EVG ( Goethals et al., 2008 ),
and is considered as a RAM for EVG. Hombrouck et al. (2008) selected
E92Q during IVRS studies with the naphthyridine L-870,810, and Kobayashi
et al. (2008) selected E92Q with EVG, S-1360 and L-870,810. E92Q has
been associated occasionally with failure in patients on RAL treatment
as an additional minor mutation of RAL accompanying the primary N155H
mutation ( Johnson et al., 2008 , Malet et al., 2008 ). Therefore, it
will be preferable for a second generation INI to effectively inhibit
the N155H/E92Q virus.

Mutation Y143C, although associated with virologic failure in patients
treated with RAL, was not selected by our IVRS studies with RAL. Y143C
seems to be exclusively associated with low level of resistance to RAL,
but remains uncommon.

Mutation N155S was previously selected *in vitro* by a diketo acid
analog ( Hazuda et al., 2004 ) and by S-1360 ( Kobayashi et al., 2008 ).
Only a 4-fold reduction in susceptibility to RAL was conferred by N155S,
where in comparison the N155H mutant showed a 12-fold reduction in
susceptibility to RAL. Thus, the change of the amino acid at position
155 from a serine to a histidine would increase resistance to RAL. The
N155H mutation is one of the major pathways selected with RAL or with
EVG *in vivo* ( Cooper et al., 2008 , McColl et al., 2007 ). Here we
observe N155H as the only primary mutation that confers, as a single
mutation, a reduction in susceptibility to Cmpd G and MK-2048, although
the reduction is minor (4- and 6-fold respectively).

Another major pathway selected with RAL or EVG involves the mutation of
the glutamine at position 148 to a lysine, a histidine or an arginine.
Because Q148H is the most common mutation selected with RAL in the
clinic ( Johnson et al., 2008 ), it will be essential for the
next-generation compounds to inhibit the viruses with this mutation. We
observed that Q148H alone retained wild-type susceptibility to MK-2048
and Cmpd G, highlighting their potential as second generation
inhibitors.

In our study, the additional effect of G140A in combination with Q148R
caused an additional decrease in susceptibility to the INIs and a
reduction in replication capacity compared with the recombinant virus
with the Q148R mutation alone.

Delelis et al. (2009) demonstrated that in the Q148H/G140S mutant virus,
the G140S rescued the replication deficiency of the Q148H mutant, while
the mutation Q148H is responsible for resistance to RAL. Fransen et al.
(2008) found that Q148H and G140S in combination reduced susceptibility
to RAL much more than either mutation alone. We also observed a large
decrease in susceptibility to all INIs due to the addition of G140S to
Q148H and we speculate that Q148H/G140S would evolve from the Q148H
virus, due to both a recovery of replicative capacity and a decrease in
susceptibility. G140S in combination with the Q148K mutation had only a
limited additional effect on the susceptibility to most INIs. Fransen et
al. (2008) even observed a suppressed resistance conferred by Q148K and
G140S together compared with Q148K alone. Nakahara et al. (2009) have
reported an additional 2-fold increase in susceptibility to S-1360 when
adding the G140S mutation to Q148K. Moreover, a reduced viral fitness of
the Q148K virus compared with wild-type virus was reported, where the
fitness was partially recovered by addition of the secondary mutation
G140S to Q148K. The addition of E138K to the mutant viruses Q148K/G140S,
Q148H/G140S or Q148R/G140A did not confer increased resistance against
the INIs, but E138K did partly compensate the reduced replication of the
mutant virus Q148R/G140A.

The addition of V54I to the Q148R/G140A/E138K recombinant virus did not
confer further resistance to RAL or to the other INIs, but slightly
improved the replication capacity of the triple mutant virus. To our
knowledge, V54I has not been identified as a polymorphism ( Lataillade
et al., 2007 ) and due to the better replication capacity of the
recombinant virus with V54I, we suggest it is a compensatory mutation
resulting from IVRS with RAL.

To better understand the influence of the found mutations on inhibitory
activity, RAL was docked into the model of Chen et al. (2008) . The
mutations, associated with resistance to RAL, i.e. E92Q Y143R/C,
Q148R/H/C and N155S/H are highlighted in the model. All primary
mutations clustered proximal to the catalytic triad represented by the
DDE motif of IN ( Fig. 4 ). Various mechanisms by which resistance is
conferred by these mutations are likely complex and can be proposed. A
first mechanism of resistance is based on a change in an amino acid
resulting in loss of the group/moiety to which the drug is bound. In the
model of Chen, Q148 and Y143 are located in the hydrophobic pocket and
are key residues making direct contact with the benzyl moiety of RAL;
mutation of these two residues can result in loss of direct drug--enzyme
contact, hence leading to resistance. E92 is located at site 3 in the
model and makes a polar interaction with RAL; substitution of E92 to a
glutamine disturbs this polar interaction, leading to a reduced
drug--enzyme contact and consequently to resistance to RAL. Another
mechanism of resistance is based on the possible influence of IN
mutations on the positions of the Mg ^2+^ ions, thereby interfering with
the chelating function of the inhibitor. In the model, the residue at
position 155 makes contact with one of the Mg ^2+^ ions. Therefore,
mutation N155H may affect the coordination of the Mg ^2+^ ions within
the architecture of the catalytic site and can subsequently interfere
with the chelating activity of RAL. Another possibility is that N155H,
which is in close proximity of the viral DNA, may indirectly interrupt
the binding of the inhibitor by altering formation of the complex
between IN and viral DNA. A high resolution X-ray diffraction analysis
of the crystal structure of the inhibitor-bound IN complex with DNA,
which has remained elusive to date, would help to test these hypotheses.

Here we examined the association of selected mutations with the activity
of a panel of INIs, including second-generation INIs, and the profiles
of drug-resistant mutants *in vitro* . This research enabled us to
identify several mutational pathways leading to resistance against
first-generation INIs like RAL, and illustrates the higher genetic
barrier to resistance development of second-generation INIs. A better
understanding of the mechanisms leading to INI resistance is needed to
optimize their use in HIV-infected patients and, enables the design of
new second-generation INIs.

::: section

## Materials and methods

### Abbreviations

EC ~50~ , inhibitor concentration required for 50% inhibition of HIV-1
replication in cell culture; CC ~50~ , cytotoxicity, inhibitor
concentration required for 50% inhibition of cell growth; HIV-1, human
immunodeficiency virus type 1; HIV-1 (IIIB), wild-type HIV-1; IN,
integrase; INI, integrase inhibitor; LTR, long terminal repeat; HAART,
highly active antiretroviral therapy; SDM, site-directed mutant; EGFP,
enhanced green fluorescent protein; MOI, multiplicity of infection; CCID
~50~ , infectious dose required for infection of 50% of cell culture;
IVRS, *in vitro* resistance selection; RAM, resistance associated
mutation; RAL, raltegravir; EVG, elvitegravir; Cmpd G, Compound G.

### Anti-viral compounds

Elvitegravir (EVG, GS-9137; Sato et al., 2006 ); Raltegravir (RAL,
MK-0518; Anker and Corales, 2008 ); L-870,810 ( Hazuda et al., 2004 );
PACA (a 3-Hydroxy-4-oxo-4,6,7,8,9,10-hexahydro-pyrimido\[1,2- *a*
\]azepine-2-carboxylamide; Belyk et al. ); PICA (a 9 *H* -Pyrido\[3,4-
*b* \]indole-3-carboxamide; Kuki et al., 2005 ); Compound G (6 *R*
)-2-\[(3-chloro-4-fluorophenyl)methyl\]-8-ethyl-1,2,6,7,8,9-hexahydro-10-hydroxy-
*N* ,6-dimethyl-1,9-dioxo-yrazino\[1′,2′:1,5\]pyrrolo\[2,3- *d*
\]pyridazine-4-carboxamide (Cmpd G; Wai et al., 2007 ) and MK-2048 (
Vacca et al., 2007 ); and the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
Zidovudine (AZT; Horwitz et al., 1964 ) were obtained from commercial
suppliers or were synthesized in-house. Chemical structures are shown in
Fig. 5 and resulting activity and toxicity in Table 3 .

### Cells and viruses

The human T-lymphoblastoid cell line MT4 was kindly provided by Dr.
Naoki Yamamoto (National Institute of Infectious Diseases, AIDS Research
Center, Tokyo, Japan). The cell line was maintained in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum, 2 mM l
-glutamine, 0.1% NaHCO ~3~ , antibiotics (0.02% gentamycin, 0.8% G418),
and stored in a humidified incubator with a 5% CO ~2~ atmosphere at
37 °C.

MT4--LTR--EGFP cells were obtained by transfecting MT4 cells with a
selectable construct encompassing the coding sequences for the HIV-LTR
as a promoter for the expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) and subsequent selection of permanently transfected cells.
MT4-CMV-EGFP cells were obtained by selection for permanently
transformed MT4 cells with an EGFP reporter gene under control of the
consecutive CMV promotor.

HIV-1 (IIIB) was provided by Dr. Guido van der Groen (Institute of
Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium). HIV-1 molecular clone pHXB2D was
provided by Centre for AIDS Reagents (ARP206; Brussels, Belgium).

Site-directed mutants (SDMs) of IN coding sequences were constructed in
the pUC19-5′HXB2D vector ( *Xba* I-- *Sal* I fragment of pHXB2D),
containing the HIV-1 clone HXB2D IN coding sequence, by using the
QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) and
high-performance liquid chromatography-purified primers (Genset Oligos,
La Jolla, CA). Plasmid sequences were confirmed by dideoxyribose
sequencing.

### Generation of the SDM virus stocks

MT4 cells were subcultured at a density of 250,000 cells/ml on the day
before transfection. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in
phosphate-buffered saline at a concentration of 3.1 × 10 ^6^ cells/ml. A
0.8 ml portion (2.5 × 10 ^6^ cells/ml) was used for each transfection.
Transfections were performed with the Bio-Rad Gene pulser (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA) with 0.4 cm electrode cuvettes (Bio-Rad). Cells were
electroporated with 10 µg of *Sal* I-linearized pUC19-3′HXB2D ( *Sal*
I-- *Xba* I fragment of pHXB2D) and 5 µg *Sal* I-digested SDM at 250 µF
and 300 V, followed by a 30 min incubation at room temperature. Next,
10 ml of fresh culture medium was added to the suspension of transfected
cells, which was then incubated at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with
5% CO ~2~ . Cell cultures were monitored for the appearance of
cytopathic effect (CPE). At virus breakthrough (full CPE), culture
supernatant was typically harvested by centrifugation at 8 to 10 days
after transfection and was stored at −80 °C for subsequent drug
susceptibility determination.

### Antiviral assays

The antiviral activity of inhibitors was determined in a cell-based
HIV-1 replication assay in triplicate. Briefly, MT4-LTR-EGFP cells
(400,000 cells/ml) were infected with HIV-1 (IIIB, HXB2D, selected
viruses, or SDM strains; multiplicity of infection MOI = 0.0025) in the
presence or absence of inhibitor. After 3 days of incubation, the
inhibition of HIV replication was quantified by measuring EGFP
fluorescence, and expressed as EC ~50~ values. The cytotoxicity of
inhibitors was determined in parallel on mock-infected MT4-CMV-EGFP
cells (150,000 cells/ml) cultured in the presence or absence of test
compound concentrations (data not shown). After three days of
incubation, inhibition of cell proliferation was quantified by measuring
the EGFP fluorescence, and expressed as CC ~50~ values (cytotoxicity,
50% inhibitory concentration of cell growth).

### Genotyping

Viral RNA was extracted from culture supernatant or virus stock using a
NucliSens easyMAG apparatus (bioMérieux, Marcy l\' Etoile, France), a
high-throughput automated nucleic acid extraction system. cDNA encoding
reverse transcriptase and IN was generated with Expand Reverse
Transcriptase (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), followed by
amplification of the IN region by nested PCR (1456 bp). PCR products
were genotyped by automated population-based full-sequence analysis (ABI
PRISM BigDye Terminator cycle sequencing; Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA). Sequencing results were reported as amino acid changes
compared with the HIV-1 (IIIB) or (HXB2D) wild-type reference sequence.
Mutations present in more than 25% of the total virus population were
detected as a mixture with the wild type virus.

### Automated IVRS experiments in 96-well plates (  Goethals et al., 2008  )

*In vitro* selection was performed in 96-well plates, with each row
representing a separate IVRS experiment. In contrast with the classical
IVRS experiment, where the compound concentration is only increased at
viral breakthrough, this method uses a protocol where the virus is
challenged with an increased compound concentration at each passage.
HIV-1 IIIB was used as starting strain for the IVRS with RAL, whereas
HIV-1 HXB2D was used as starting strain for IVRS with MK-2048 and Cmpd
G.

### Replication kinetics of recombinant viruses

MT4 cells (120,000 cells) were infected with HIV-1 (HXB2D or recombinant
viruses; MOI of 0.0001) in the absence of inhibitor ( Fig. 3 ). Every
day, cells were examined for the appearance of HIV-1-induced CPE. In
addition, aliquots of cell-free supernatants were taken for
determination of viral p24 levels (HIV-1 p24 enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay, Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA).

### Molecular modeling

Compounds were docked, using glide (ref: Glide, version 5.0,
Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2008.), in a model provided by Chen et
al. (2008) , who developed a model of HIV-1 IN bound to the viral DNA,
thereby mimicking the strand transfer complex. In this model an X-ray
structure of the IN CCD is combined with viral DNA, which is based on
the crystal structure of DNA-bound Tn5, a structural homologue of HIV-1
IN. The flexible loop (residues 140--152) was computationally
constructed in the presence of viral DNA, since the biologically
relevant conformation of this loop may be dependent on the presence of
bound DNA.
