# Antiretroviral-Experienced HIV-1-Infected Patients Treated with Maraviroc: Factors Associated with Virological Response


## Abstract

There are few data on the clinical and virological factors associated
with the virological response (VR) of maraviroc (MVC) in clinical
practice. This study aimed to identify factors associated with the VR to
MVC-containing regimens in 104 treatment-experienced but CCR5
inhibitor-naive HIV-1 patients. VR was defined at month 3 (M3) as HIV-1
RNA viral load (VL) \<50 copies/ml. The impact on VR of age, sex,
baseline tropism, HIV subtype (B vs. non-B), nadir CD4 cell count and
CD4 cell count, baseline VL, genotypic susceptibility score of
treatment, once or twice daily treatment, presence of raltegravir in
optimized background therapy, and MVC concentrations was investigated.
Median baseline VL was 3.3 log ~10~ copies/ml (range 1.7--6.0 log ~10~
copies/ml) and CD4 cell count was 299 cells/mm ^3^ (range 7--841
cells/mm ^3^ ). At M3, 53.8% of patients were responders. In univariate
analysis, a better efficacy of the MVC-containing regimen was associated
with a high CD4 cell count ( *p* =0.0069) and there was a trend for low
baseline VL, high nadir CD4 cell count, and HIV subtype (B versus
non-B). Only low baseline VL remained significantly associated with
better VR in the multivariate analysis. This study demonstrated a VR of
an optimized antiretroviral treatment including MVC in clinical practice
similar to that observed in clinical trials. The factors associated with
VR were higher baseline CD4 cell count in univariate analysis and lower
baseline VL in multivariate analysis.



## Materials and Methods

### Patients

In total, 104 HIV-1 patients followed in two clinical centers (Pitié
Salpêtrière and Bichat Hospital) signed individual consent forms. The
study was approved by the Scientific Committee of AC11 ANRS. The 104
patients had received MVC (Celsentri, ViiV) as part of their current ARV
treatment prescribed by their physician during routine medical care.
They had a VL \>50 copies/ml at the beginning of this study. They had
never previously been treated with CCR5 antagonists.

### Virological testing

The VL (Cobas AmpliPrep/cobasTaqman HIV-1 test, Roche Diagnostics,
Meylan, France) and CD4 ^+^ cell counts were measured after 3 months of
treatment (M3). The coreceptor usage was determined from the V3 *env*
region sequence by geno2pheno before the introduction of MVC
(false-positive rate 10%). ^4^ The reverse transcriptase, protease, and
integrase resistance mutations were interpreted with the last ANRS
genotypic algorithm ( www.hivfrenchresistance.org ). According to the
ANRS algorithm, the genotypic susceptibility score of treatment (GSS) of
the MVC cotreatment received by the patient was calculated as follows: 1
for a sensitive drug and 0 for a resistant or possibly resistant drug.
The HIV-1 subtype was determined either by the Smartgene algorithm
(Smartgene, Switzerland) or by phylogenetic analyses, by estimating the
relationships among RT sequences and reference sequences of HIV-1
genetic subtypes and circulating recombinant forms (CRF) obtained from
the Los Alamos Database ( http://hiv-web.lanl.gov ). Phylogenetic trees
were inferred using the neighbor-joining method and two Kimura
parameters with 1,000 bootstrap values. The GenBank (
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/GenBank ) accession numbers for the RT are
KP140846-KP140941 .

### Pharmacology methods

The MVC trough plasma concentrations, collected 12 h after the last drug
intake, were determined using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem
mass spectrometry (UPLC-TQD Acquity Waters) with some modification at
M3. ^5^

### Statistical methods

The VR was defined at M3 as VL \<50 copies/ml. The impact of age, sex,
baseline tropism, HIV subtype (B vs. non-B), nadir CD4 cell counts and
CD4 cell counts, baseline VL, GSS, once or twice daily treatment,
presence of raltegravir in optimized background therapy, and MVC
concentrations at M3 was investigated. Comparisons between groups were
then performed using the nonparametric Mann--Whitney and chi-squared
tests. All variables providing a *p* -value\<0.20 in the univariate
analysis were selected by the stepwise procedure to build the final
multivariate model. Statview software v5.0 was used.


## Results

The main characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 1 .
The HIV-1 was X4-tropic for 11/104 patients. The subtypes were
distributed as follows: 76 B subtypes and 28 non-B subtypes (one A
subtype; 13 CRF02_AG; three CRF06_cpx; one CRF11_cpx; two CRF14; one D
subtype; two F subtype; two G subtype; one J subtype; two undetermined
subtype).

Among the 104 patients included in the present analysis, 53.8% (56/104)
were responders at M3. The durability of the VR was checked after 6
months (M6): 67% (48/71) of patients had a VL \<50 copies/ml. Among all
of the studied factors, only CD4 T cell counts at baseline were
associated with VR in univariate analysis (234 cells/mm ^3^ in median
for the patients with VL \>50 copies/ml and 353 cells/mm ^3^ in median
for patients with VL \<50 copies/ml, respectively; *p* =0.069). It is of
interest that nadir CD4 cell count, baseline VL, and HIV subtypes (B or
non-B subtypes) tend to be associated with the VR ( Table 2 ). These
factors were then analyzed in a multivariate statistical analysis and
only the baseline VL was associated with the VR (3.8 log ~10~ copies/ml
in median for the patients with VL \>50 copies/ml and 3.3 log ~10~
copies/ml in median for patients with VL \<50 copies/ml, respectively;
Table 2 ). Furthermore, there was a trend toward an association of HIV
subtypes with the VR. The patients with subtype B viruses had a lower VL
than patients with non-B viruses at M3 (1.6 log ~10~ copies/ml and 1.9
log ~10~ copies/ml for the B and non-B subtype-infected patients,
respectively), although the patients with subtype B viruses had a higher
VL at baseline (3.5 log ~10~ copies/ml and 3.1 log ~10~ copies/ml for
the B and non-B subtype-infected patients, respectively). There was also
a difference in CD4 cell count between subtypes B and non-B (323 versus
214 cells/mm ^3^ , respectively; *p* =0.0122). As the non-B subtype
group could not be homogeneous, multivariate analysis was also performed
removing the B vs. non-B analysis. Only the baseline VL was associated
with the VR as previously demonstrated ( *p* =0.0553).


The VR was studied according to the baseline tropism. For the 48
patients with a VL \>50 copies/ml at M3, 6 and 42 of the patients had
X4- and R5-tropic viruses at baseline, respectively. The HIV-1 tropism
was not associated with the VR ( *p* =0.7867). For the 42 patients with
R5-tropic viruses at baseline, the tropism was available for 22
nonresponder patients at M3 (16 patients remained with R5-tropic viruses
and six patients had a change of tropism). No statistical differences
were observed for these 22 nonresponder patients for VL, CD4 cell count,
nadir CD4 cell count, and subtypes according to the tropism at failure (
Table 3 ).


## Discussion

In this study, 53.8% of patients were responders at M3 to an ARV
treatment including MVC, and better VR was associated with a high
baseline CD4 cell count in univariate analysis and there was a trend for
low baseline VL, high nadir CD4 cell count, and HIV subtype. Only low
baseline VL remained significantly associated with VR in the
multivariate analysis.

In the present study, we observed a VR in clinical practice similar to
what was previously described in clinical trials, even if the background
treatment was nonstandardized. Indeed, suppression of viral replication
at week 48 was achieved in 42% (once daily) and 47% (twice daily) in
MOTIVATE 1, 45% in MOTIVATE 2 (ARV-experienced patients), and 65.3% in
MERIT (ARV-naive patients). ^1\ ,\ 3^

A high baseline VL was independently associated with a worse VR as was
previously demonstrated in the ANRS Genotropism study. ^4^ We also
showed in the present study that a low baseline CD4 cell count was
associated with worse VR. In the MODERN trial, the proportion of
subjects with HIV-1 RNA viral load \<50 copies/ml was always lower for
the maraviroc--darunavir/ritonavir arm compared to the
darunavir/ritonavir plus emtricitabine/tenofovir arm according to CD4
strata. ^6^ As it was previously shown that the presence of
R5X4/X4-tropic viruses was linked to a low CD4 cell count, X4-tropic
viruses could have been present but not detected by bulk sequencing. ^7^
It would be interesting to evaluate the determination of HIV-1 tropism
by ultradeep sequencing and the impact on VR in clinical practice.

Although in this study only 28 patients were infected with the non-B
subtype, which could represent a limitation in addressing the impact of
HIV-1 subtype on MVC activity, we noticed a trend in the impact of
subtype on VR that had previously been approached in the MERIT and
MOTIVATE studies. ^1--3^ It is still unclear if there are any variations
in intrinsic MVC activity against the B vs. non-B subtype or lack of
sensitivity or specificity in the determination of tropism. ^8--11^
However, the HIV-1 tropism determination method does not seem to have an
impact as the MVC effect on the non-B subtype was similar whatever
method was used: phenotypes in MERIT and MOTIVATE or genotypes in our
study.

This study demonstrated in clinical practice that MVC remained a
valuable therapeutic option in an optimized background regimen for
HIV-1-experienced patients, similar to that observed in clinical trials.
In addition, our results showed that VR to MVC is better for patients
with a high CD4 cell count and low VL, providing information for
clinical practice.

