# Dolutegravir Resistance Mutation R263K Cannot Coexist in Combination with Many Classical Integrase Inhibitor Resistance Substitutions


## Abstract

The new integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI) dolutegravir (DTG)
displays limited cross-resistance with older drugs of this class and
selects for the R263K substitution in treatment-experienced patients. We
performed tissue culture selections with DTG, using viruses resistant to
older INSTIs and infectivity and resistance assays, and showed that the
presence of the E92Q or N155H substitution was compatible with the
emergence of R263K, whereas the G140S Q148R, E92Q N155H, G140S, Y143R,
and Q148R substitutions were not.

Go to:


## TEXT

Although considerable progress has been made in HIV therapy, drug
resistance has emerged for every available drug class, threatening
long-term care and the potential for a cure ( 1 ). The first two
integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs), raltegravir (RAL) and
elvitegravir (EVG), can be compromised by primary substitutions that
generate resistance at the expense of fitness ( 2 ), the majority of
which occur in the catalytic core domain of the integrase protein (IN).
Although the newer INSTI dolutegravir (DTG) has not yielded resistance
when used in initial therapy ( 3 ), our group selected an R263K
substitution in HIV-1 IN in tissue culture with DTG ( 4 ). We showed
that R263K, located in the C-terminal portion of the protein, confers
moderate resistance to DTG and EVG, while also decreasing the
biochemical activity of IN by ∼30% ( 5 ). The R263K substitution was
also found in two of four INSTI-naïve treatment-experienced participants
who failed DTG therapy in the SAILING clinical trial (of 354 patients)
but otherwise continued to perform well ( 6 ). This suggests that R263K
is a signature substitution for DTG.

In contrast, 7/51 individuals who previously failed RAL-based regimens
and who possessed primary resistance mutations subsequently failed
DTG-based therapy in the VIKING trial without R263K ( 7 ), suggesting
that the substitutions that confer resistance to RAL or EVG might be
incompatible with R263K.

(This work was largely performed by K. Anstett in partial fulfillment of
the requirements for a Ph.D. degree at McGill University.)

To test this hypothesis, biochemical analyses of the strand transfer
efficiencies of integrase proteins containing the E92Q, Y143R, Q148R,
and N155H RAL or EVG resistance substitutions, both alone and in
combination with R263K, were performed ( Fig. 1 ). Site-directed
mutagenesis was performed as described previously ( 4 , 5 ) to introduce
E92Q, Y143R, Q148R, and N155H into the wild-type (pET15b ~wt~ ) and
mutant (pET15b ~R263K~ ) integrase subtype B expression vectors (primer
sequences available upon request). Recombinant integrase proteins were
expressed and purified and strand transfer assays were performed as
published ( 4 , 5 ). Table 1 summarizes the enzyme kinetics values *K
~m~* and *V* ~max~ for each protein tested. Every single mutation had a
significant negative impact on strand transfer activity, and this effect
was exacerbated when these substitutions were combined with R263K. Among
single mutant proteins, the Q148R- and N155H-containing integrases were
the most impacted with regard to *K ~m~* , with fold changes of 2.49 and
2.72 from the wild type (WT), respectively. Combinations of E92Q and
R263K or Q148R and R263K resulted in the lowest levels of strand
transfer activity ( Fig. 1 and Table 1 ).

FIG 1

Relative strand transfer efficiencies of mutant integrase proteins when
concentrations of biotinylated target DNA were varied. Wild-type and
R263K integrase proteins were included as internal controls in each
panel. (A) E92Q ± R263K; (B) Y143R ± R263K; (C) Q148R ± R263K; (D) N155H
± R263K. Error bars show the standard error of the mean (SEM). The
addition of R263K to each single-resistance mutation consistently led to
a decrease in strand transfer activity.


We then measured the effects of these mutations in isolation or with
R263K on the relative infectiousness of NL4.3 virus as described
previously ( 5 ). HIV-1 infectivity was measured through the infection
of 30,000 TZM-bl cells per well using serial 1:4 dilutions of the NL4.3
variants. After 48 h, cells were lysed, and luciferase production was
measured using the Promega luciferase assay system (Promega, Madison,
WI). Each single substitution had a negative impact on infectiousness.
The NL4.3 ~IN(Y143R\ R263K)~ and NL4.3 ~IN(Q148R\ R263K)~ viruses showed
the greatest declines with increases in relative 50% effective
concentration (EC ~50~ ) of 17.9- and 29.6-fold compared to the wild
type, respectively. The NL4.3 ~IN(N155H\ R263K)~ virus had a
significantly lower EC ~50~ than did the NL4.3 ~IN(R263K)~ single mutant
(fold change of 1.2 for N155H R263K compared to 2.7 for R263K alone),
suggesting that the addition of N155H partially restored the deficit in
infectivity observed with R263K.

We next measured HIV-1 susceptibility to DTG, RAL, and EVG in tissue
culture through the determination of the 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC ~50~ ) ( Table 2 ). HIV susceptibilities to INSTIs were measured
through infection of 30,000 TZM-bl cells using 200,000 reverse
transcriptase (RT) units per well of each virus in the presence of 1:4
serial dilutions of drugs. Levels of infection were measured as
described above. The NL4.3 ~IN(R263K)~ virus displayed a 2-fold increase
in resistance against DTG compared to the wild type, as previously
observed ( 4 , 5 , 8 , 9 ). The impairment of replication seen with the
NL4.3 ~IN(Y143R\ R263K)~ and NL4.3 ~IN(Q148R\ R263K)~ viruses impeded
data collection. The addition of R263K to NL4.3 ~IN(E92Q)~ significantly
increased the IC ~50~ for DTG to 24.9 nM compared to 18.2 nM for the WT
(1.4-fold), whereas the IC ~50~ s were 13.2 nM and 36.3 nM for NL4.3
~IN(E92Q)~ and NL4.3 ~IN(R263K)~ , respectively. Importantly, the
addition of N155H to R263K, which partially restored the defect in
infectiousness associated with the latter mutation, also increased
resistance against DTG (from 2.0- to 3.3-fold relative to the WT).

The addition of R263K to the classical INSTI resistance substitutions
did not have a major effect on HIV-1 susceptibility to RAL. The NL4.3
~IN(E92Q)~ virus was highly resistant against EVG, and resistance levels
were unaffected by the addition of R263K. In contrast, the addition of
R263K to N155H increased resistance to EVG by 1.4-fold.

Finally, we investigated whether RAL- or EVG-resistant viruses would
permit the emergence of the R263K mutation during tissue culture
selections in cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMCs) infected with various
viruses in the presence of DTG ( Table 3 ), performed as described
previously ( 10 , 11 ). The NL4.3 ~wt~ , NL4.3 ~IN(E92Q)~ , and NL4.3
~IN(N155H)~ viruses were all able to select for R263K. Although none of
the other combinations of substitutions were compatible with the
emergence of R263K, the G140S Q148R mutant virus was able to select for
H51Y, a secondary resistance mutation that has been associated with
R263K in DTG resistance ( 5 ). As previously shown, the NL4.3 virus was
unable to select for a compensatory mutation that could restore the
decrease in fitness conferred by R263K ( 5 , 9 , -- 11 ), suggesting
that E92Q or N155H must be present first if R263K is to subsequently
arise.


These results are consistent with recent clinical observations of the
N155H resistance pathway in treatment-experienced patients failing
therapy with RAL and DTG ( 12 , -- 14 ). Our results also explain the
absence of the R263K mutation in participants in the VIKING clinical
trial who failed DTG after having previously failed either RAL or EVG,
as substitutions at positions 140 and 148 were common in that trial ( 7
).

