

## Request Username

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

Email\*

Close


## Create a new account

Email

Returning user


## Change Password

Old Password

New Password

close

-    Login
-    Register

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-

Email\*

Password\*

Forgot password? Reset it here

Keep me logged in

Fields with \* are mandatory

Don\'t have an account? Create one here

-

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your password?

Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset
instructions

Email\*

Cancel

CLOSE

This Journal

Enter words / phrases / DOI / ISBN / keywords / authors / etc

Search Search

Advanced search

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

Suggested Terms:

-   open access policy
-   peer review at ASM
-   what it costs to publish with ASM
-   calls for editors
-   asm journals collections

0

Login

Skip main navigation

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

JOURNALS

0

Login

::: {role="main"}

1.   ASM Journals
2.   Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
3.   Vol. 59, No. 1
4.   In Vitro Resistance Selection with Doravirine (MK-1439), a Novel
Nonnucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor with Distinct Mutation
Development Pathways

Advertisement

Research Article

23 December 2014

Share on

-
-
-
-


# *In Vitro* Resistance Selection with Doravirine (MK-1439), a Novel Nonnucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor with Distinct Mutation Development Pathways

Authors : Meizhen Feng , Deping Wang , Jay A. Grobler , Daria J. Hazuda
, Michael D. Miller , Ming-Tain Lai Authors Info & Affiliations

DOI : https://doi.org/10.1128/aac.04201-14

76
2,867

### Metrics

###  Total Citations   76

###  Total Downloads   2,867

Cite

PDF/EPUB

-    Contents

AAC

Volume 59 , Number 1 \
January 2015

-   ABSTRACT
-   INTRODUCTION
-   MATERIALS AND METHODS
-   RESULTS
-   DISCUSSION
-   REFERENCES

-
-    Information & Contributors
-    Metrics & Citations
-    References
-    Figures and Media
-    Tables
-    Share

::: section

## ABSTRACT

Doravirine (DOR, formerly known as MK-1439) is a human immunodeficiency
type 1 virus (HIV-1) nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
(NNRTI) that is currently in phase 2b clinical trials. *In vitro*
resistance selection of subtype B virus (MT4-green fluorescent protein
\[GFP\] cells), as well as subtype A and C viruses (MT4-GFP/CCR5 cells)
was conducted with DOR, rilpivirine (RPV), and efavirine (EFV) under
low-multiplicity-of-infection conditions in a 96-well format. Resistance
selection was performed with escalating concentrations of the NNRTIs
ranging from the 95% effective concentration (1× EC ~95~ ) to 1,000× EC
~95~ in the presence of 10% fetal bovine serum. In the resistance
selection of subtype B virus with DOR, a V106A mutant virus led to two
mutation pathways, followed by the emergence separately of either F227L
or L234I. In the resistance selection of subtype A and C viruses,
similar mutation development pathways were detected, in which a V106A or
V106M mutant was also the starting virus in the pathways. Mutations that
are commonly associated with RPV and EFV in clinical settings were also
identified in subtype B viruses such as the E138K and K103N mutants,
respectively, in this *in vitro* resistance selection study. The
susceptibility of subtype B mutant viruses selected by DOR, RPV, and EFV
to NNRTIs was evaluated. Results suggest that mutant viruses selected by
DOR are susceptible to RPV and EFV and mutants selected by RPV and EFV
are susceptible to DOR. When the replication capacity of the V106A
mutant was compared with that of the wild-type (WT) virus, the mutant
virus was 4-fold less fit than the WT virus.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

Human immunodeficiency type 1 virus (HIV-1) infection has become a
global epidemic, as there are more than 35 million people worldwide who
are infected with HIV-1 and approximately 2.3 million people were newly
infected in 2012 on the basis of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS 2013 report ( 1 ). HIV-1-infected patients have been
successfully treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
HAART regimens generally comprise three agents from at least two
different mechanistic classes. Although HAART effectively controls the
progress of disease and restores the immune function of patients, the
treatment does not eradiate the virus. As a result, lifelong treatment
must be maintained, which may lead to therapy fatigue and to medication
noncompliance because of adverse effects. Under these circumstances,
resistant viruses often emerge and lead to treatment failure.
Consequently, mutant viruses with reduced susceptibility to the licensed
agents remain a constant threat to HAART.

Reverse transcriptase (RT) plays an essential role in the HIV-1
replication cycle, converting single-stranded viral RNA into
double-stranded DNA that is then integrated into the host cell genome by
HIV-1 integrase for subsequent transcription and translation processes
to generate infectious viral particles ( 2 ). As a result, inhibition of
RT is one of the primary strategies used to suppress HIV-1 replication (
3 ). Two different classes of RT inhibitors are available for treating
HIV-1 infection. The first class is nucleoside RT inhibitors (NRTIs)
which are active-site inhibitors and act as chain terminators of DNA
polymerization catalyzed by RT because of the lack of a 3′ hydroxyl
group for chain extension. The other class is non-NRTIs (NNRTIs), which
bind to an exo site of RT, causing significant conformational changes
within RT and leading to inhibition of the enzyme. Current HARRT for
treating HIV-1-infected patients often contains an NNRTI and two NRTIs,
such as Atripla (efavirenz \[EFV\]-tenofovir disproxil fumarate
\[TDF\]-emtricitabine \[FTC\]) and Complera (rilpivirine
\[RPV\]-TDF-FTC).

To date, there are five NNRTIs available for use in combination with
other classes of antiviral agents to effectively suppress HIV-1
replication ( 4 , 5 ). Nevirapine (NVP) was approved in 1996, and it has
to be taken twice a day with food. In 2011, an extended-release version
of NVP with once-a-day dosing was approved by the FDA. NVP has been
associated with hepatotoxicity, substantial skin reactions (including
Stevens-Johnson syndrome), hypersensitivity reactions, and, in some
studies, excess rates of early discontinuation or inferior efficacy ( 6
). Delavirdine (DLV) was approved in 1997, and it must be taken three
times daily and is no longer among the recommended agents for initial
therapy. EFV was approved in 1998, and it remains the preferred NNRTI
for treatment initiation according to multiple guidelines. However, EFV
is associated with substantial central nervous system intolerance and
skin rash, as well as lipid abnormalities ( 7 , 8 ). In addition, it can
be a perpetrator of drug-drug interactions as it is a mixed inducer and
inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP2B6 enzymes. Etravirine (ETR) was approved in
2008. It must be given twice daily and is not recommended as part of an
initial treatment regimen. RPV was approved in 2011 and has been
recommended by these guidelines as an alternative NNRTI agent for
treatment initiation. RPV was shown to have suboptimal efficacy in
patients with viral loads of \>100,000 copies/ml or CD4 ^+^ cell counts
below 200 copies/ml at the baseline ( 9 , 10 ). In addition, the E138K
substitution, accounting for the majority of mutants in patients who
have experienced RPV-containing regimen failure, was found to be
associated with the most prevalent NRTI mutants containing M184V/I
substitutions (11--13).

A single mutation was often found to confer high-level resistance to the
antiviral agents in the same class. For example, a virus with the K103N
substitution exhibits a high level of resistance to EFV, NVP, and DLV. A
Y181C mutant is highly resistant to NVP and DLV and displays a low level
(∼4-fold) of resistance to RPV and ETR ( 11 ). In the clinical setting,
a Y181C mutant has also been associated with virologic failures of
regimens containing NVP, RPV, or ETR ( 10 , 14 ). Moreover, both K103N
and Y181C mutants are the two most prevalent NNRTI-associated, as well
as transmitted, viruses ( 15 , 16 ). Therefore, new NNRTIs that offer
improved potency against the two mutants, a distinct resistance profile,
dosing convenience, and a favorable safety and tolerability profile
would provide HIV-1 patients with an additional choice for effective
treatment. To this end, a novel NNRTI, doravirine (DOR), was identified
as a potential new antiviral agent. DOR displayed efficacy against the
wild-type (WT) virus, as well as the most common NNRTI-resistant
variants such as the K103N and Y181C mutant viruses ( 11 ). The mutant
profile of DOR is superior to that of EFV and comparable to that of RPV
( 11 ). In preclinical toxicity studies, no article-related findings
were observed in either antemodem or postmodem analyses. Clinical
pharmacology studies indicate that DOR can be taken once daily with or
without food, which offers dosing convenience to patients ( 17 ). In
addition, DOR is not a metabolic inducer or inhibitor, reducing the
likelihood of causing significant drug-drug interactions ( 17 ).

To further characterize DOR, *in vitro* resistance selection was
conducted to understand the potential mutation development pathways of
the virus in the presence of DOR. There are at least nine different
HIV-1 subtypes in the M group (A, B, C, D, F, G, H, J, and K), and
subtypes A and C are the most prevalent HIV globally ( 18 ). Subtype B
virus, on the other hand, is predominant in North America and Europe.
Therefore, DOR resistance selection was performed with HIV-1 subtypes A,
B, and C under low-multiplicity-of-infection (MOI) conditions in the
presence of 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). In addition, two licensed
NNRTIs, EFV and RPV, were also included in these studies as comparators.
Resistance selection with subtype B virus was also conducted under
high-MOI conditions at fixed concentrations of the inhibitors in the
presence of 10% FBS ( 19 ). Mutants selected under high-MOI conditions
are consistent with the results obtained under low-MOI conditions. The
susceptibility of the selected mutant viruses to NNRTIs was evaluated
under single replication cycle conditions. The results suggest that the
mutants selected by DOR were susceptible to RPV and EFV and the mutants
selected by RPV and EFV were susceptible to DOR.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

The cells used (293T) were from the ATCC (Manassas, VA). Fugene HD
transfection reagent was bought from Promega (Madison, WI). Dulbecco\'s
modified Eagle medium was purchased from Life Technology (Grand Island,
NY). Fetal bovine serum was obtained from HyClone (Logan, UT). G418 and
hygromycin were from Life Technology (Grand Island, NY).
pQBILTRGagGEPNeo was purchased from MP Biomedicals (Santa Ana, CA). The
Bravo liquid-handling station used came from Agilent Technologies (Santa
Clara, CA). The Acumen eX3 cytometer was bought from TTP Labtech
(Cambridge, MA). MagMAX Express 96, the MagMAX 96 viral RNA isolation
kit, RPMI medium, the Superscript III one-step RT-PCR system, and the
TOPO TA cloning system for sequencing were obtained from Life
Technologies (Grand Island, NY). Black and clear 96-well poly- d
-lysine-coated or noncoated plates were purchased from BD Biosciences
(San Jose, CA). The SeqScape software V3 and ABI 3100 analyzer used were
from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). The WT and K103N and Y181C
mutant HIV-1 R8 strains were produced by Advanced Biotechnologies Inc.
(Columbia, MD). RPMI 1640 medium were purchased from Invitrogen
(Carlsbad, CA).

### Generation of mutant viruses.

Each mutant was created by the site-directed mutagenesis method via gene
synthesis and subcloning into plasmid RT112, which contained full-length
R8 provirus DNA. The resulting clones were subjected to fluorescence
sequencing to verify the presence of the desired mutation(s) and the
absence of extraneous mutations.

### Cells and viruses.

Cells (293T) were grown in Dulbecco\'s modified Eagle medium containing
10% FBS. MT4-green fluorescent protein (GFP) cells were grown in RPMI
1640 medium containing 10% FBS and 0.4 mg/ml G418; MT4-GFP/CCR5 cells
were grown in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS, 0.4 mg/ml G418, and
0.4 mg/ml hygromycin.

293T cells were seeded at 2.5 × 10 ^6^ per well of a 10-cm-diameter
dish. After incubation for 24 h, the cells were transfected with 18 µg
of provirus plasmid DNA using Fugene HD transfection reagent. The
supernatant was harvested at 48 h posttransfection. Each mutant virus
was evaluated for of MT4-GFP reporter cell infectivity.

### Development of MT4-GFP/CCR5 reporter cells.

MT4 cells were transfected with pQBILTRGagGEPNeo, in which Gag-fused GFP
was expressed under the control of the long terminal repeat (LTR)
promoter with G418 as a selectable marker. A stably expressing cell
clone was obtained by G418 drug selection and subsequent cell sorting to
isolate single Gag-GFP-expressing cells ( 20 ). MT4-GFP cells were
cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% Pen-Strep,
and 0.4 mg/ml G418 and incubated in a humidified incubator with 5% CO
~2~ at 37°C.

MT4-GFP/CCR5 cells were generated by introducing stably expressed CCR5
genes into MT4-GFP cells. A single MT4-GFP/CCR5 cell clone was selected
by the hygromycin and subsequent cell sorting method. The best final
cell clone was determined on the basis of the robustness of the
fluorescent signal after infection with both M- and T-tropic virus
assays and was further validated by assessing compound potency with the
selected cell clones in a single replication cycle assay. MT4-GFP/CCR5
cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 1%
Pen-Strep, 0.4 mg/ml G418, and 0.4 mg/ml hygromycin and then incubated
in a humidified incubator with 5% CO ~2~ at 37°C.

### *In vitro* resistance selection with HIV-1 subtype A, B, and C viruses under low-MOI conditions.

*In vitro* resistance selection was performed in a 96-well format with
each row containing a series of concentrations of NNRTIs in 1:2 serial
dilutions, with the highest concentration (1,000 times the 95% effective
concentration \[1,000× EC ~95~ \]) in column 1 and the lowest (1× EC
~95~ ) in column 11. Column 12 served as a virus control with no
compound. Therefore, each row represented an independent resistance
selection experiment. Cells (MT4-GFP/CCR5 for A and C viruses and
MT4-GFP for subtype B virus; cell density, 75,000/well) and viruses
(subtype A \[92W026\], B \[R8\], or C \[93MW959\], each at an MOI of
0.01) were added to 96-well plates containing serial dilutions of
NNRTIs.

After 3 to 4 days of culturing, a new selection cycle was initiated. The
procedure used was as follows. A preprepared compound plate containing
NNRTI concentrations as described above was thawed; this was followed by
the addition of fresh MT4-GFP cells (with or without a CCR5 coreceptor,
depending on the virus subtype). Supernatant (30 μl) was removed from
each well of the plate from the previous selection cycle and split into
three 10-μl portions. These three portions were used to infect the
freshly prepared cells in the wells at NNRTI concentrations 1, 2, and 4
times the concentration in the original well from which the supernatant
was removed. This procedure was repeated every 3 to 4 days on a Bravo
liquid-handling station. For every passage, the plates were scanned with
an Acumen eX3 cytometer to monitor the level of viral replication. When
evidence of virus replication was observed via detection of green
fluorescence in the wells of column 1 (with the highest concentration of
NNRTIs), the supernatant was removed from the plate and used for
genotyping analysis.

### Resistance selection with HIV-1 subtype B virus using MT4-GFP cells under high-MOI conditions.

The resistance selection protocol used is similar to that employed for
selection under low-MOI conditions, except that the selection pressure
was fixed at 3, 10, or 30 times the EC ~95~ of the NNRTI with no
distribution of supernatant from the low-concentration wells to the
higher-concentration wells during each passage. Viral breakthrough was
judged by the appearance of green fluorescence in wells upon scanning
with the Acumen eX3 cytometer.

### Analysis of RT mutation(s) in the breakthrough viruses from the resistance selection studies.

Viral RNA was extracted with the MagMAX 96 viral RNA isolation kit from
culture supernatant of breakthrough virus stock from the resistance
studies described above. The RT-encoding region was amplified by the
one-step RT-PCR method. PCR products were genotyped by an automated
population-based full-length sequencing method (covering amino acids 1
to 440 of the RT region). The primers used for PCR amplification of
subtype B virus were AAGCAGGAGCCGATAGACAA (forward) and
TAATCCCGAATCCTGCAAAGCTAGA (reverse). The sequencing primers were
5′-CCCTGTGGAAGCAC and 5′-GGATGTGGGCGATGC. The amplification primers used
for subtype A sequencing were AGGCTATAGGTACAGTATTAGTAGGACCTAC (forward)
and TGTTCAGCTTGATCCCTTACCTG (reverse). Primers GACCTACACCTGTCAACATAATT,
TGTCTTCCTCTGTCAGTAACATAC, GGAAAGGATCACCGGCAATA, and
TTGCTCTATGCTGCCCTATTT were used for sequencing analysis. The primers
used in PCR amplification for subtype C sequencing were
GACACAGGAGCAGATGATACAG (forward) and AGCACTTTCCTGATTCCACTAC (reverse).
Primers ACCTGTCAACATAATTGGAAGAAAT, TTCTGCCTTCCTTTGTCAGTAA,
GATGGAAAGGATCACCAGCA, and GCTCTATGTTGCCCTATTTCTAAG were used for
sequence analysis. Sequencing results were reported as amino acid
changes compared with WT HIV-1 92RW026 (subtype A), R8 (subtype B), and
93MW959 (subtype C) reference sequences.

### Relative replication capacity of the V106A mutant.

The relative replication capacity of the V106A mutant was measured in a
growth competition experiment. MT4-GFP cells (2.5 × 10 ^6^ ) were
infected with either WT or V106A mutant virus at an estimated MOI of
0.001 in a final volume of 5 ml at 37°C in 5% CO ~2~ for 1 h. Cells were
then washed, counted, and resuspended in complete RPMI medium, and
various ratios of WT and V106A mutant virus-infected cells were mixed
and added to a 12-well cell culture plate at a cell density of 0.2 × 10
^6^ per well. After incubation for 3 to 4 days, 10 μl of culture
supernatant was used to infect 2 × 10 ^6^ fresh MT4-GFP cells in the
plates. At each passage, 50 μl of supernatant from each well was
harvested for population or clonal sequence analysis. For clonal
sequence analysis, RT-PCR products were cloned into the TOPO TA vector
and then transformed into Top10 competent cells; 30 bacterial colonies
from each sample were analyzed. The relative prevalence of WT and mutant
viruses at each passage was quantitated on the basis of the clonal
sequence proportion of the viruses. The experiments were performed in
triplicate.

::: section

## RESULTS

DOR displays efficacy against the WT virus, as well as the two most
prevalent NNRTI-associated mutant viruses containing K103N and Y181C
substitutions, with EC ~95~ s of 20, 42, and 27 nM in the presence of
50% NHS, respectively ( 11 ). These potencies are more than 30-fold
better than that of EFV against the K103N mutant virus and more than 9-
and 4-fold better than those of ETR and RPV versus the Y181C mutant
virus, respectively ( 11 ).

To evaluate potential mutations that would be selected by DOR *in vitro*
with HIV-1 subtype A, B, and C viruses, resistance selection experiments
were conducted in a 96-well format using MT4-GFP cells (for subtype B
virus) with the CCR5 coreceptor (for subtype A and C viruses), which is
controlled by transcription of the LTR to express GFP. Each well of the
plate contained different concentrations of the compounds under
investigation, ranging from a low compound concentration (column 11) to
a high compound concentration (column 1). Under low-MOI conditions, as
described in Materials and Methods, supernatant from wells with a lower
concentration of DOR was distributed to wells containing a higher
concentration of the compound during each passage. As a result, a small
portion of the mutant viruses that broke through at the lower
concentration of DOR would be transferred to wells containing higher
concentrations of the compound, facilitating viral breakthrough even
under higher selective pressure. By this strategy, viral breakthrough
was observed with compound concentrations as high as 1,000× EC ~95~ .
The plates were scanned with the Acumen eX3 cytometer after each passage
during the resistance selection process. Detection of green fluorescence
was indicative of viral breakthrough and was found to progress gradually
from column 11 to column 1 as viral breakthrough started from column 11,
which contained the lowest concentration of NNRTI (1× EC ~95~ ), as
shown in Fig. 1 . Breakthrough viruses were harvested and subjected to
population sequence analyses after green fluorescence was observed on
the entire plate, as shown in Fig. 1 at day 81. Mutation data were
collected from two independent experiments with a total of 16 repeats
(two plates, eight rows each).

FIG 1

### Resistance selection in subtype B virus.

The results of resistance selection with subtype B virus are shown in
Table 1 . Two major mutation development pathways were associated with
DOR exposure in this study. V106A was the first mutant identified in
breakthrough viruses at a lower concentration of DOR. As the compound
concentration increased, an additional amino acid substitution emerged,
such as F227L or L234I, to give a V106A/F227L or V106A/L234I double
mutant. As the concentration increased further, an additional F227L
substitution evolved in the V106A/L234I mutant to give a triple mutant
that overcame the selection pressure. Other minor mutation development
pathways were also observed in the selection with DOR, such as starting
with a V108I mutant, followed by the emergence of V106A and L234I
substitutions sequentially, or starting with an L234I mutant virus,
followed by the sequential addition of V108I and V106A substitutions.

TABLE 1

^a^

Experiments were conducted at least three times. Values in parentheses
indicate fold resistance (means ± standard deviation) of the mutants.

As discussed above, the V106A mutant is the major variant responsible
for viral breakthrough in resistance selection with DOR in subtype B
viruses. Therefore, the replication capability of the V106A mutant was
compared with that of the WT virus to evaluate the potential for V106A
to revert to the WT in the absence of drug pressure. Several methods can
be used to assess viral replication capability ( 21 ). In this study,
the approach of coculturing mutant and WT viruses, following by clonal
sequencing of the supernatant at each passage, was used. The replication
capacity of the V106A mutant was assessed by culturing a fixed ratio of
WT and V106A mutant viruses on the same plate ( 22 ). The supernatant
was removed for clonal sequencing to determine the percentage of each
virus at different time points. As shown in Fig. 2 , the percentage of
V106A mutant versus WT virus continued to decrease as the passage number
increased. With this trend, the V106A mutant will eventually be replaced
by the WT virus. The replication capacity of the V106A virus was
calculated according to the equation 1 + *s* = 1 + ln\[( *M ~t~* / *M*
~0~ )/( *R ~t~* / *R* ~0~ )\] \[1\] ( 22 ).

FIG 2

The term 1 + *s* is the relative fitness or difference ( *n* -fold)
between the growth constants of the WT and mutant strains. *R ~t~* is
the proportion of the WT strain at time *t* , *M ~t~* is the proportion
of the V106A mutant at time *t* , *R* ~0~ is the proportion of the WT
strain at time zero, and *M* ~0~ is the proportion of the V106A mutant
at time zero. The results suggest that the replication capacity of the
V106A mutant is 25% of that of the WT virus, which is consistent with
previous reports indicating that the V106A mutant\'s fitness is
significantly compromised compared with that of the WT virus ( 23 ). As
a result, the V106A mutant may not be able to survive under the high
selective pressure of DOR.

Resistance selection with the benchmark compound EFV was also conducted
under the same conditions for comparison. As shown in Table 1 , three
mutation development pathways were identified. Two of them started with
the L100I mutant, followed by an additional K103N or V179D substitution.
The L100I/K103N-containing virus was highly resistant to EFV, with a
fold change (FC) in potency relative to the WT virus of \>200-fold. On
the other hand, the L100I/V179D mutant, with an FC of 75 to EFV,
requires an additional mutation to overcome the selective pressure as
the DOR concentration is increased to 160× EC ~95~ , rendering the
emergence of the P225H or M230L substitution to give a triple mutant
(L100I/V179D/P225H or L100I/V179D/M230L) to circumvent the selection
pressure. The third mutation pathway was initiated by a K103N mutant
followed by the addition of an L100I substitution to give the
K103N/L100I double mutant, which is similar to the first mutation
development pathway.

Three mutation development pathways were also identified in the
resistance selection with another licensed NNRTI, RPV. The first pathway
was initiated with the E138K substitution, followed by the emergence of
an L100I substitution. Upon a further increase in the RPV concentration,
a triple mutant (E138K/L100I/V179I) breakthrough virus was identified.
The second pathway was also started with an E138K mutant, followed by
the addition of the V106A substitution under higher selective pressure.
K101P mutant was the first mutant observed in the third mutation
pathway, and a V179I substitution was found to evolve subsequently at
higher concentrations of RPV.

Resistance selection in subtype B virus with MT4-GFP cells was also
conducted under high-MOI conditions at DOR and EFV concentrations of 3,
10, and 30 times the EC ~95~ . With DOR, most of the viral breakthroughs
( *n* = 24) were observed at only 3 times the EC ~95~ . Population
sequencing analysis indicated that the mutations selected under these
conditions are similar to those observed under low-MOI conditions. In
other words, the most frequently identified mutant viruses contained
mutations that gave the V106A, L234I, F227L, and V108I substitutions.
Although the V108I mutation was not listed as the major mutation pathway
under low-MOI conditions, it was involved in several minor mutation
pathways. Similarly, the majority of the viral breakthroughs occurred at
3 times the EC ~95~ in the selection with EFV. The mutations selected
under these conditions are also consistent with the results obtained
under low-MOI conditions, in which K103N, L100I, and V179D were the
major mutants identified in the breakthrough viruses. The same
conditions were employed for resistance selection with RPV. Only a few
viral breakthroughs were observed at 3 times the EC ~95~ . The amino
acid substitutions were found to be K101E, E138K, and Y181C, and they
are commonly associated with viruses found in patients who have
experienced virologic failure while on a regimen containing RPV ( 24 ).

### Resistance selection in subtype A virus.

In the resistance selection of subtype A virus with DOR using
MT4-GFP/CCR5 cells, the major mutation pathway started with the V106A
mutant at a lower concentration of the compound (a small portion of the
breakthrough viruses had the V106M substitution), followed by the
development of the F227L mutant (a small portion of the breakthrough
viruses had a C or V substitution). A minor mutation pathway also
emerged in this selection study with V108I as the first mutant
identified in the breakthrough virus. As the compound concentration
increased, the L234I and V106A(I) substitutions sequentially developed
to give a triple mutant \[V108I/L234I/V106A(I)\]. The results are shown
in Table 2 . In the resistance selection with EFV, there were also two
mutation pathways identified, in which the L100I and V106M mutants led
each of the pathways, followed by the emergence of Y188H(C) or V179D and
Y188C or L100I substitutions, respectively. For resistance selection
with RPV, the major mutation pathway was led by the E138K mutant with
the emergence of an L100I substitution at a higher concentration of RPV.
This pathway is similar to the pathway detected in the selection with
subtype B virus. However, as the RPV concentration continued to
increase, an additional substitution that was different from the pathway
in subtype B virus emerged to give the triple mutant E138K/L100I/V108I,
as opposed to E138K/L100I/V179I with subtype B virus. A minor pathway
was started with the Y181C mutant with the emergence of a V108I
substitution at a higher concentration of RPV.

TABLE 2

^a^

An amino acid in the parentheses represents a minor population.

### Resistance selection in subtype C virus.

The resistance selection results obtained with subtype C virus are shown
in Table 3 . Two mutation pathways were identified in the selection with
DOR. The V106A mutant again led the first selection pathway, followed by
the emergence of an F227I substitution. The other pathway was led by the
V106M mutant, followed by the addition of an F227C substitution. As for
the results obtained with EFV, they were similar to those obtained from
the resistance selection with subtype A virus, where mutants L100I and
V106M led the two mutation pathways. The L100I mutant was followed by
sequential emergence of V106M and Y188C (or F227C) substitutions at
higher concentrations of EFV instead of the Y188H or V179D substitution
obtained with subtype A virus. The V106M pathway was followed by a Y188C
substitution as the compound concentration increased. Unique mutation
development pathways were discovered in the resistance selection
experiments with RPV in subtype C virus. Although the common mutation
E138K was found to be associated with RPV, the subsequent mutation gave
a unique double mutation, E138K/K101E. In spite of the E138K or K101E
single mutation being generally associated with RPV, the double mutant
has not been identified before. E138 and K101 form a salt bridge in the
RT region of the WT virus, and either an E138K or a K101E substitution
breaks the salt bridge, conferring resistance to RPV. The E138K/K101E
substitutions, however, may restore the salt bridge formation and thus
restore sensitivity to RPV. More studies are required to understand the
impact of this double substitution on viral replication capacity and
susceptibility to NNRTIs. In addition, the L100V/M230I double mutant was
identified in the breakthrough viruses also representing a unique
mutation development pathway because the L100I and M230L substitutions
are more common at these positions. As the compound concentration
increased, an additional amino acid change of F227C emerged to give a
triple mutant. The third mutation pathway started with mutant E138Q,
which is also not a usual substitution at this position, followed by the
emergence of L100I.

TABLE 3

### Susceptibility of mutants selected in subtype B virus to NNRTIs.

In the process of developing an antiviral agent, it is important to
understand the cross-resistance profile of a novel compound with other
licensed antiviral agents in the same class. Therefore, mutants selected
by DOR, RPV, and EFV in this study were generated via site-directed
mutagenesis and tested for their susceptibility to the three NNRTIs. As
shown in Fig. 3A , the V106A mutant displayed an approximately 10-fold
resistance to DOR. In addition, the double substitutions V106A/F227L and
V106A/L234I and the triple substitution V106A/L234I/V108I conferred
\>150-fold resistance to DOR. However, the mutants were susceptible to
RPV and EFV, with an FC of \<6, except for theV106A/F227L mutant, which
showed a 22-fold resistance to EFV. The susceptibilities of mutants
selected by EFV to NNRTIs are shown in Fig. 3B . The L100I and K103N
mutants displayed 10- and 56-fold resistance to EFV, respectively. The
L100I/V179D double mutant exhibited a \>75-fold resistance to EFV, and
the level of resistance of the L100I/K103N and L100I/V179D/P225H mutants
to EFV was \>200-fold. However, those mutants are highly susceptible to
DOR, with an FC of ≤2. They also had a low level of resistance to RPV,
except for the L100I/K103N mutant, which displayed a 16-fold resistance
to RPV. Figure 3C shows the susceptibilities of mutants selected by RPV
to NNRTIs. Interestingly, although they were selected by RPV, most of
the mutants were \<10-fold resistant to RPV. The K101P and K101P/V179I
mutants, on the other hand, were highly resistant to RPV, with FCs of 40
and 199, respectively. The mutant viruses also showed 32- and 76-fold
resistance to EFV. In contrast, all of the mutants selected by RPV were
susceptible to DOR with an FC of \<10. In summary, mutants selected by
DOR are susceptible to RPV and EFV and mutants selected by RPV and EFV
are susceptible to DOR.

FIG 3

::: section

## DISCUSSION

Among NNRTIs, DOR displays the best potency against the two most
prevalent NNRTI-associated mutants containing K103N and Y181C
substitutions ( 11 ). On the basis of the X-ray structure of the RT-DOR
complex, the nitrogen atoms in the methyl-triazolone ring interact with
the backbone, but not with the side chain, of K103 via two hydrogen
bonds, as shown in Fig. 4 . As a result, the impact of the K103N
substitution on the interactions between the residue and DOR is minimal,
as the interactions between N103 and the DOR triazole ring remain
intact. Y181 does not play an important role in the binding of DOR to
RT, given the long distance between the cyanochlorophenol group of DOR
and Y181 based on the X-ray structure. Therefore, it is not surprising
that the Y181C mutation does not confer high resistance to DOR, with an
FC of \<2, likely explaining the lack of selection of this mutant in
resistance selection experiments. In contrast, the cyanochlorophenol
moiety forms π-π stacking with Y188, and the Y188L substitution
eliminates the π-π interactions and creates a clash with DOR; thus, the
Y188L substitution confers significant resistance to DOR, suggesting
that the π-π interactions between the residues are crucial for the
binding of DOR to RT.

FIG 4

As mentioned above, the V106 substitution accounts for the majority of
the mutants selected by DOR in the *in vitro* resistance selection
study. The side chain of V106 is close to the central ring of DOR, with
a distance of 3.5 Å based on the X-ray structure shown in Fig. 4 . It
appears that the isopropyl group on the Val side chain makes van der
Waals interactions with DOR in the NNRTI binding pocket. Replacement of
the isopropyl group with a methyl group (V106A) weakens the interactions
between RT and DOR, rendering 10-fold resistance of the virus to DOR.
Interestingly, substitutions at position V106 were often found to be
associated with substitution at F227 as the concentration of DOR
increased in the resistance selection with subtypes A, B, and C.
Although the F227 residue has a limited interactions with the triazole
ring of DOR, it is in close proximity to V106, at a distance of 3.5 Å
based on the X-ray structure. Therefore, residue substitution at
position 227 may, in turn, alter the interactions between the residue at
227 and V106A, causing conformation changes of the latter, which may
further reduce the interactions between the V106A mutant and DOR,
causing significant resistance to DOR.

The amino acid at position 106 is a valine in the WT virus. GTA
represents the most common codon at the position (\>95%) in subtype A
and B viruses, and GTG is the major codon in subtype C virus at the
position (97%) ( 25 ). The V106M mutant confers a high level of
resistance to EFV, and the substitution is a signature mutation
associated with EFV in subtype C virus in the clinical setting ( 26 ).
However, although the V106M mutant confers a high level of resistance to
EFV, the mutant was not associated with EFV in subtype B virus because
two base changes are required for the substitution (from GTA to ATG) (
27 ). In contrast, only a single base change is needed for the V106M
substitution in subtype C virus (GTG to ATG). Interestingly, the codon
at position 106 was found to be a mixture of GTA and GTG in the WT
subtype A virus (92RW026) that we used in this study. As a result, in
the resistance selection with EFV, V106M was selected in the subtype A
virus because the V106M mutant displays a high level of resistance to
EFV and required only a single base change for the conversion (from GTG
to ATG) ( 22 ). The V106A mutant was not selected, as the virus is
susceptible to EFV although it also requires only a single base change
(GTG to GCG) ( 22 ). On the other hand, both the V106A and V106M mutants
were identified in the breakthrough viruses from the resistance
selection with DOR in subtype A and C viruses. As mentioned earlier, the
V106A mutant of subtype B virus exhibits an approximately 10-fold
resistance to DOR. It is reasonable to hypothesize that the V106A and
V106M mutations in subtype A and C viruses also confer a similar level
of resistance to DOR, enabling the virus to survive under the high
selective pressure of DOR.

In the *in vitro* resistance selection study with EFV, the K103N
substitution, which represents the most prevalent mutant associated with
the NNRTI, was selected in one of the three mutation pathways. In
addition, L100I was the lead mutant in two out of three mutation
pathways followed by the emergence of a K103N or V179D substitution at a
higher concentration of EFV. The L100I/K103N mutant is one of the
frequent double mutants associated with EFV ( 28 ). Although two out of
three mutation pathways started with the L100I mutant, that substitution
is rarely identified as the only change in samples from patients treated
with an EFV-containing regimen who experience virologic failure ( 29 ).
It always appears along with K103N substitution. Part of the reason why
the L100I mutant is not seen in the clinical setting may be the high
trough concentration of EFV (∼5 μM) in plasma at 24 h after dosing,
which is more than enough to suppress an L100I mutant, thereby requiring
an additional mutation that gives a L100I/K103N double mutant to
overcome the selective pressure. In addition, although the V179D mutant
is not listed as the prevalent NNRTI-associated virus, it has often
emerged with other mutants under the selective pressure of EFV ( 30 ).
Moreover, in the resistance selection with RPV, the E138K substitution
represented the first substitution in the two out of three mutation
pathways, which is consistent with the finding that the E138K mutant was
the most frequently selected mutant in a clinical setting, although it
was often associated with M184I/V ( 9 , 10 ). In addition, the K101P
mutant, which is also often associated with RPV in clinical findings,
was also identified leading the third mutation pathway in breakthrough
viruses ( 31 ). Therefore, results from *in vitro* resistance selection,
to some extent, can predict the potential mutations that may develop in
the clinical setting.

As aforementioned, the mutants selected by DOR were susceptible to RPV
and EFV and mutants selected by RPV, as well as EFV, were susceptible to
DOR. These results suggest that DOR can be used to treat naive patients
because other NNRTIs are still capable of suppressing the mutant viruses
that cause treatment failure under a DOR regimen. Furthermore, DOR may
be used to treat experienced patients because DOR is highly active
against mutants selected by RPV and EFV. As a result, DOR can be a
valuable addition to the currently available NNRTI antiviral agents.

::: section