# Effectiveness and Safety of Tenofovir Gel, an Antiretroviral Microbicide, for the Prevention of HIV Infection in Women

Quarraisha Abdool Karim , ^\*,^ ^1,^ ^2^ Salim S. Abdool Karim , ^\*,^
^1,^ ^2,^ ^3^ Janet A. Frohlich , ^1^ Anneke C. Grobler , ^1^ Cheryl
Baxter , ^1^ Leila E. Mansoor , ^1^ Ayesha B.M. Kharsany , ^1^ Sengeziwe
Sibeko , ^1^ Koleka P. Mlisana , ^1^ Zaheen Omar , ^1^ Tanuja N Gengiah
, ^1^ Silvia Maarschalk , ^1^ Natasha Arulappan , ^1^ Mukelisiwe
Mlotshwa , ^1^ Lynn Morris , ^4^ and Douglas Taylor ^5^ , on behalf of
the CAPRISA 004 Trial Group

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer

The publisher\'s final edited version of this article is available at
Science

**This article has been corrected.** See the correction in volume 333
on page 524.


## Associated Data

Supplementary Materials

:



## Abstract

The CAPRISA 004 trial assessed effectiveness and safety of a 1% vaginal
gel formulation of tenofovir, a nucleotide reverse transcriptase
inhibitor, for the prevention of HIV acquisition in women. A
double-blind, randomized controlled trial was conducted comparing
tenofovir gel (n=445) with placebo gel (n=444) in sexually active,
HIV-uninfected 18-40 year-old women in urban and rural KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa HIV serostatus, safety, sexual behavior and gel and condom
use were assessed at monthly follow-up visits for 30 months. HIV
incidence in the tenofovir gel arm was 5.6 per 100 women-years (wy),
i.e. person time of study observation, (38/680.6wy) compared to 9.1 per
100 wy (60/660.7wy) in the placebo gel arm (Incidence Rate Ratio
(IRR)=0.61; p=0.017).In high adherers (gel adherence \>80%), HIV
incidence was 54% lower (p=0.025) in the tenofovir gel arm. In
intermediate adherers (gel adherence 50-80%) and low adherers (gel
adherence \< 50%) the HIV incidence reduction was 38% and 28%
respectively. Tenofovir gel reduced HIV acquisition by an estimated 39%
overall, and by 54% in women with high gel adherence. No increase in the
overall adverse event rates was observed. There were no changes in viral
load and no tenofovir resistance in HIV seroconvertors. Tenofovir gel
could potentially fill an important HIV prevention gap, especially for
women unable to successfully negotiate mutual monogamy or condom use.


##

Women are disproportionately affected by the Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome (AIDS) epidemic in Africa, the region which accounts for 70% of
global burden of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection ( 1 ).
Current HIV prevention behavioral messages on abstinence, faithfulness
and condom promotion have had limited impact on HIV incidence rates in
women, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, where young women bear the
greatest HIV burden ( 2 ). The search for new technologies to prevent
sexually transmitted HIV infection over the past three decades has had
limited success. Only five of 37 randomized controlled trials, which
tested 39 HIV prevention strategies, have demonstrated protection
against sexual transmission of HIV infection ( 3 ). The successful
trials tested medical male circumcision in South Africa ( 4 ), Kenya ( 5
) and Uganda ( 6 ) (combined effectiveness in reducing HIV acquisition =
57%), sexually transmitted infection (STI) treatment in Tanzania
(effectiveness in reducing HIV acquisition = 42%) ( 7 ) and a HIV
vaccine combination in Thailand (effectiveness in reducing HIV
acquisition = 31%) ( 8 ). Hence, HIV prevention technologies that women
can use and control remain a pressing priority ( 9 ).

Microbicides are products that can be applied to the vagina or rectum
with the intention of reducing the acquisition of STIs including HIV. An
effective microbicide has the potential to alter the trajectory of the
global HIV pandemic ( 10 ). Over the last 20 years of microbicide
research, none of the 11 effectiveness trials of six candidate products
have demonstrated meaningful protection against HIV infection ( 11 ).

Tenofovir, an adenosine nucleotide analog with potent activity against
retroviruses ( 12 ), was initially developed and tested as a
prophylactic in monkeys and was subsequently formulated for oral use as
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Viread ^®^ ), which is now widely used
for HIV treatment. Tenofovir\'s efficacy in suppressing viral
replication, favorable safety profile and long half-life ( 13 ), made it
an ideal choice as the first antiretroviral drug to be formulated as a
microbicide gel. *In vitro* and *in vivo* assessments of the 1%
concentration of tenofovir in a gel formulation have demonstrated its
potential as a microbicide ( 13 ). Tenofovir has shown efficacy against
viral challenge in animal models when administered as pre- or
post-exposure prophylaxis ( 14 - 15 ). In monkey challenge studies,
tenofovir gel has shown protection with intermittent dosing and with a
single pre-exposure dose ( 16 ).In early stage clinical trials,
tenofovir gel was well tolerated in both HIV negative and HIV positive
women ( 17 ), with both daily and coitally-related use of the gel being
found to be acceptable and safe ( 18 ).

The purpose of this study was to assess the effectiveness and safety of
tenofovir gel for the prevention of HIV infection in women.



## Study design and population

CAPRISA 004, a two-arm, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial, was conducted from May 2007 to March 2010. Women were enrolled at
an urban and a rural clinic in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, but the
study was not designed to assess the effectiveness of tenofovir in each
clinic separately. Urban women were enrolled at the CAPRISA eThekwini
Research Clinic, adjacent to an STI clinic located in the Durban city
centre. Rural women were enrolled at the CAPRISA Vulindlela Research
Clinic, adjacent to a comprehensive primary health care clinic in
Vulindlela, a rural community of approximately 90,000 people, about
150km north-west of Durban. Prior to the CAPRISA 004 trial, feasibility
studies were conducted to assess HIV incidence and sexual behavior at
both sites. Extrapolated HIV incidence rates from prevalence studies in
the urban ( 19 ) and rural ( 20 ) sites were 15.6% and 11.2%
respectively. Reported anal sex rates were substantially lower at these
two sites than we had observed in previous microbicide trials ( 21 ) in
female sex workers in this region. Data from these feasibility studies
were used as the basis for selecting these sites for the trial as well
as for the design and sample size calculations for the CAPRISA 004
trial.

HIV negative women, from 18 to 40 years, who were sexually active
(defined as having engaged in vaginal sex at least twice in the 30 days
prior to screening), not pregnant, and using a non-barrier form of
contraceptive were eligible for enrolment. Participants who had a
history of adverse reactions to latex, planned to either travel away
from the study site for more than 30 consecutive days, relocate away
from the study site, become pregnant, or enroll in any other behavioral
or investigational product study were excluded. Participants who had a
creatinine clearance \<50ml/min, ( 22 ), had evidence of genital deep
epithelial disruption, had in the past year participated in any research
related to any vaginally applied product/s, or had an untreated STI or
reproductive tract infection were also excluded. Women who met
eligibility criteria and demonstrated adequate understanding of the
trial (through a comprehension checklist) were enrolled after providing
written informed consent. From May 2007 to January 2009, 2160 women were
screened, 1085 were enrolled, of whom 889 were included in the analysis
( Figure 1 ). Further information on the enrollment process and
exclusions can be found in SOM

Figure 1

Screening, enrolment, randomization and follow-up of the study
participants in the CAPRISA 004 tenofovir gel trial.

\* *Note* : co-enrolment occurred only in the urban clinic

Enrolled women were randomly assigned in equal proportions to one of two
study arms; tenofovir gel or placebo gel. Tenofovir gel comprised 40mg
of 9- \[(R)-2-phosphonomethoxy)propyl\]adenine monohydrate (PMPA) in a
solution of purified water with edetate disodium, citric acid, glycerin,
methylparaben, propylparaben, and hydroxyethycellulose (HEC). The
placebo gel was the "universal" HEC placebo gel which has been shown to
have minimal anti-HIV activity ( 23 ). Tenofovir and placebo gels
appeared identical and were dispensed in the same pre-filled vaginal
applicators with identical packaging.

A coitally-related dosing strategy was selected to achieve high
adherence, based on in-depth consultations with the communities
involved. Sexual behavior data showed that women in the key study
population had infrequent high-risk sex with migrant partners. Monkey
challenge data and perinatal transmission studies informed the timing of
doses in relation to sex. The "before and after" sex doses were modeled
on the timing of nevirapine in its proven strategy for preventing
mother-to-child HIV transmission ( 24 ). Women were requested to insert
one dose of gel within 12 hours ** b ** efore sex and a second dose of
gel as soon as possible within 12 hours ** a ** fter sex and no more
than ** t ** wo doses of gel in a ** 24 ** -hour period. Hence the
dosing strategy is referred to as "BAT24". The latter restriction was
imposed due to the lack of human safety data on more than two doses of
gel per day.

Gel adherence was defined as the estimated proportion of reported sex
acts covered by two gel doses and calculated for each woman by dividing
half the number of returned used applicators each month by the number of
reported sex acts that month. Applicators that were not returned were
regarded as unused for the purposes of calculating adherence. When we
conducted a sensitivity analysis treating unreturned applicators as
used, the results did not change materially. The median of each woman\'s
monthly adherence estimates was assigned as her overall gel adherence.
This approach assumed that every reported sex act utilized two doses of
gel. While this assumption was not always applicable, adjusting for
multiple sex acts within 24 hours made no material difference.

At enrolment and monthly follow-up visits, participants were provided
with comprehensive HIV prevention services (HIV pre- and post-test
counseling, HIV risk reduction counseling, condoms, and STI treatment),
reproductive health services, and assigned study gel.

Participants were requested to return their used (from October 2007
onwards) and unused applicators at every visit. Each month the
applicators returned by women as used and unused were counted,
reconciled against number dispensed, and thereafter discarded, in
accordance with standard requirements for medical waste.

A comprehensive adherence support program assisted participants with the
mechanics of applicator use, timing and dosing, avoidance of gel
sharing, and incorporation of gel use into their daily routines. From
October 2008, individualized, motivational interviewing ( 25 - 26 ) was
introduced to assist participants to overcome obstacles to gel use and
set goals for optimal adherence in the upcoming month. This included
individualized adherence support and counseling, customized on the
previous month\'s experience of gel use, which was provided throughout
the study. The women in this study were specifically and repeatedly
counseled to only use the gel vaginally and the lack of safety with
rectal use was highlighted.

Each participant had monthly HIV and urine pregnancy testing (QuickVue
One-Step hCG Urine Test Quidel Corporation, San Diego, USA) performed
before gel was dispensed. Due to a lack of pregnancy safety data, gel
use was temporarily discontinued after a positive pregnancy test and
resumed when the pregnancy test returned to negative. Self-reported data
on gel use and sexual frequency during the last 30 days were collected
at monthly visits, together with gel and condom use on the day of the
last sex act, by means of a brief interviewer-administered
questionnaire. Two months after study exit, participants attended a
post-trial visit to assess HIV status and safety after product
withdrawal.

Drug safety was assessed at every study visit by evaluating, grading and
recording adverse events experienced by participants. Participants
underwent quarterly pelvic examinations and, if needed, colposcopy.
Serology was performed for hepatitis B virus (Abbott Architect C8200,
Abbott Laboratories, Detroit, MI) and herpes simplex type 2 virus (Kalon
Enzyme Immunoassay, Kalon Biologicals, Ashgate, UK). Hematological,
hepatic and renal abnormalities were assessed at study months 3, 12 and
24, additionally when clinically indicated, and at study exit. Adverse
events were graded for severity via the Division of AIDS Table for
Grading Adult and Pediatric Adverse Events, 2004. Product use was
temporarily discontinued for an adverse event at the discretion of the
study clinician. The trial ( NCT00441298 ) was approved by the
University of KwaZulu-Natal\'s Biomedical Research Ethics Committee
(E111/06), Family Health International\'s Protection of Human Subjects
Committee (#9946) and the South African Medicines Control Council
(#20060835).



## HIV, viral load and genotypic resistance assays

Two HIV rapid tests, Determine HIV 1/2 (Abbott Laboratories, Illinois,
USA) and Uni-Gold Recombigen® HIV test (Trinity Biotech, Wicklow,
Ireland) were performed at each study visit. Participants with
concordantly positive, discordant or indeterminate results were assessed
for possible seroconversion by two separate RNA polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) (Roche Cobas Amplicor HIV-1 Monitor v1.5, Roche
Diagnostics, Branchburg, New Jersey, USA) assays, about one week apart..
When HIV seroconversion was established, product use was discontinued
and women were referred to local AIDS treatment services, including the
CAPRISA AIDS Treatment Program which provides free antiretroviral
therapy. Stored plasma, available from prior study visits by each
seroconvertor was tested by RNA PCR to identify the window period for
HIV infection (RNA PCR positive but rapid HIV test negative) at prior
visits. By protocol, only eligibly enrolled women with HIV infection
during study follow-up, confirmed by two independent RNA PCR results,
were defined as HIV endpoints. Participants in the HIV window period at
study exit were included as HIV endpoints if seropositivity was
confirmed post-study. Thus, HIV infections were categorized as follows:
(i) HIV endpoints; (ii) HIV infections not meeting the protocol
definition for an HIV endpoint (i.e. did not have that two independent
RNA PCR tests); iii) window period HIV infections at enrolment (infected
prior to study entry); iv) post-trial HIV infections (infected after
study exit), and v) HIV infections among women who were enrolled and
later found to be ineligible (see SOM for more details).

Tenofovir resistance testing and Western Blot (Genetics systems HIV-1
Western Blot kit, BioRad Laboratories Hercules CA, USA), were performed
at the post-seroconversion visit. The HIV-1 *pol* gene was population
sequenced by means of a certified ( 27 ) in-house assay. Viral RNA was
extracted and a 1.7 kb fragment spanning the *po* l gene was amplified
by nested PCR using the Expand Long Template PCR System (Roche
Diagnostics), as described previously ( 27 ). PCR products were
sequenced (codons 1-99 of protease and codons 1-350 of reverse
transcriptase) using a BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing kit and
an ABI 3130XL DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
Consensus sequences were aligned and manually edited using the
Sequencher version 4.5 program (GeneCodes, Ann Arbor, MI) and submitted
to the Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu ) to identify mutations.



## Statistical analyses

In this endpoint driven trial, participants were followed until 92 HIV
infections were observed, providing 90% power to detect a 50% effect
(two-sided alpha = 0.05). Originally, the study was designed with 80%
power. Prior to their first data review, the Data Safety and Monitoring
Board (DSMB) ratified a change to 90% power, adjusted for two
pre-planned interim reviews with stringent stopping guidelines.

Upon enrolment, a participant was assigned a sequential identification
number, which corresponded to a unique envelope (accessible only to each
study site pharmacist) that allocated her randomly, using permuted block
randomization of sizes 12 and 18, with no stratification, to one of six
codes. The three codes assigned randomly to each of tenofovir and
placebo gels were held in confidence by the product manufacturer and
independent DSMB statistician.

The primary intent-to-treat analysis was based on a log-rank test,
stratified by site. Duration of time on study was calculated from
randomization to estimated date of HIV infection or date of withdrawal,
whichever occurred first. A Poisson distribution was assumed for
confidence intervals (CI) of incidence rates and incidence rate ratios
(IRR). Fisher\'s exact test and the unpaired t-test/Wilcoxon two-sample
test were performed where appropriate. Proportional hazards regression
models were used to calculate hazard ratios while adjusting for
potentially important covariates. All reported p-values are two-sided
and all CIs are 95%. The statistical analysis was performed using SAS
^®^ (SAS Institute Inc., Cary) Version 9.1.3.



## Results

A total of 611 rural and 278 urban women met eligibility criteria, were
enrolled and followed-up for a total of 1341 women-years (mean=18
months), with an overall study retention rate of 94.8%. Rural women were
younger and poorer with fewer lifetime sexual partners, and had lower
sexual frequency, and lower condom use ( Table 1 ). At enrolment, there
were no significant differences in the demographic characteristics and
sexual behavior of women in the tenofovir (n=445) and placebo (n=444)
gel arms ( Table 1 ).

### Table 1

Baseline demographic characteristics, sexual history and contraceptive
use by study participants in the CAPRISA 004 tenofovir gel trial

Site

Study arms

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rural\
(n=611)

Urban\
(n=278)

p-value

Tenofovir\
(n=445)

Placebo\
(n=444)

p-value

**Demographic characteristics**

Mean Age (years)

23.3

25.1

\<0.001

24.2

23.6

0.131

Monthly income \<R1000

86.1%

69.1%

\<0.001

81.1%

80.4%

0.799

Married

6.5%

3.6%

0.085

5.8%

5.4%

0.884

Stable partner

77.0%

93.1%

\<0.001

87.6%

88.5%

0.756

**Sexual behavior**

Mean age sexual debut

17.3

17.7

0.014

17.4

17.4

0.782

Mean number sexual\
partners (lifetime)

2.1

6.0

\<0.001

3.0

3.6

0.780

Mean age of oldest\
partner (past 30 days)

26.4

29.6

\<0.001

27.7

27.1

0.299

Reported sex in the past\
7 days

58.9%

68.3%

0.007

63.6%

60.1%

0.301

Always use condom\
during sex

22.9%

42.8%

\<0.001

28.8%

29.5%

0.825

New partner (past 30\
days)

0.5%

2.5%

0.014

1.3%

0.9%

0.753

Anal sex (past 30 days)

0.5%

0.4%

1.000

0.4%

0.5%

1.000

HSV-2 prevalence

47.6%

59.6%

0.001

53.5%

49.2%

0.202

**Contraception**

Injectable

83.1

79.9

0.606 ^\*^

80.7%

83.6%

0.288 ^\*^

Oral

14.6

17.6

16.4%

14.6%

Tubal Ligation

2.1

2.5

2.9%

1.6%

Hysterectomy

0.2

0.0

0

0.2%

Open in a separate window

^\*^ p-value applicable to comparison for all forms of contraception

### HIV incidence and effectiveness

The tenofovir and placebo gel arms had 38 and 60 HIV endpoints
respectively. The HIV incidence rate in the tenofovir gel arm was 5.6
per 100 women-years (wy) (CI: 4.0, 7.7) compared to 9.1 per 100 wy (CI:
6.9, 11.7) in the placebo gel arm (IRR=0.61; CI: 0.40, 0.94; p=0.017).

HIV infection trends ( Figure 2 ) show that the tenofovir gel effect was
evident soon after initiation of gel use. The steadily declining HIV
incidence rates in placebo gel arm were 11.2, 10.5, 10.2, 9.4, and 9.1
per 100 wy after follow-up for 6, 12, 18, 24, and 30 months respectively
( Figure 2 ). In contrast, the HIV incidence rate in the tenofovir gel
arm remained in a narrow range between 5.2 and 6.0 per 100 wy during the
study. The HIV incidence rate in the tenofovir gel arm, when compared to
the placebo gel arm, was 50% (p=0.007) lower after 12 months of
follow-up and 40% (p=0.013) lower after 24 months of follow-up ( Figure
2 ).

Figure 2

Kaplan-Meier estimates of cumulative probability of HIV infection in the
tenofovir and placebo gel arms. The table provides the cumulative number
of HIV endpoints, corresponding HIV incidence rates and effectiveness of
tenofovir gel for each additional 6-months of follow-up.

After adjusting for baseline covariates including, age, site, anal sex
history, contraceptive method, HSV-2 antibody status, and condom use,
the hazard ratio was 0.63 (CI: 0.42, 0.94; p=0.025). All 98 HIV
endpoints were Western Blot positive. One additional HIV infection did
not meet the protocol endpoint requirement of two independent RNA PCR
results. There were five HIV infections among ineligibly enrolled women,
10 window period HIV infections (two among ineligibly enrolled women)
and five post-trial HIV infections. Sensitivity analyses ( Table 2 ),
which include these additional HIV infections do not differ appreciably
from the overall 39% level of effectiveness.

### Table 2

Impact of adherence and non-endpoint HIV infections on the effectiveness
of tenofovir gel in HIV prevention in the CAPRISA 004 tenofovir gel
trial.

\# HIV infections / women\
years

------------------------------------------------------------------------

N

HIV incidence

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Incidence\
Rate Ratio

Effectiveness

95%\
Confidence\
Interval

p-value

Tenofovir

Placebo

Tenofovir gel\
(95% CI)

Placebo gel (95%\
CI)

**Overall effectiveness of tenofovir gel**

HIV endpoints

38 / 680.6

60 / 660.7

889

5.6 (4.0, 7.7)

9.1 (6.9, 11.7)

0.61

39%

6, 60

0.017

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Site-specific effectiveness***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rural

25 / 484.7

42 / 461.2

611

5.2 (3.3, 7.6)

9.1 (6.6, 12.3)

0.57

43%

5, 67

0.023

Urban

13 / 195.9

18 / 199.5

278

6.6 (3.5, 11.3)

9.0 (5.3, 14.3)

0.74

26%

-59, 67

0.380

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***HIV endpoints by levels of adherence ^\^^***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

High adherers (\>80% gel adherence)

11 / 259.2

25 / 269.4

336

4.2 (2.1, 7.6)

9.3 (6.0, 13.7)

0.46

54%

4, 80

0.025

Intermediate adherers (50-80% adherence)

10 / 159.8

10 / 99.7

181

6.3 (3.0, 11.5)

10.0 (4.8, 18.4)

0.62

38%

-67, 77

0.343

Low adherers (\<50% gel adherence)

16 / 258.5

25 / 290.6

367

6.2 (3.5, 10.1)

8.6 (5.6, 12.7)

0.72

28%

-40, 64

0.303

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Effectiveness of tenofovir gel by study exit HSV-2 status ^•^**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

HSV-2 positive

29 / 397.7

46 / 410.7

541

7.3 (4.9, 10.5)

11.2 (8.2, 14.9)

0.65

35%

-6, 61

0.070

------------------------------------------------------------------------

HSV-2 negative

9 / 272.8

14 / 248.0

339

3.3 ( 1.5, 6.3)

5.6 (3.1, 9.5)

0.58

42%

-45, 78

0.209

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Sensitivity analyses**

HIV endpoints *plus* HIV infection not meeting protocol definition

39 / 680.6

60 / 660.7

889

5.7 (4.1, 7.8)

9.1 (6.9, 11.7)

0.63

37%

4, 59

0.023

HIV endpoints *plus* ineligibly enrolled

40 / 720.1

63 / 698.6

1075

5.6 (4.0, 7.6)

9.0 (6.9, 11.5)

0.62

38%

7, 60

0.015

HIV endpoints *plus* women with post-trial infection

39 / 680.6

64 / 660.7

889

5.7 (4.1, 7.8)

9.7 (7.5, 12.4)

0.59

41%

11, 61

0.015

Per protocol analysis ^\#^

32 / 589.2

53 / 575.4

889

5.4 (3.7, 7.7)

9.2 (6.9, 12.0)

0.59

41%

7, 63

0.017

All HIV infections ^\*^

43 / 720.1

76 / 698.8

1085

6.0 (4.3, 8.0)

10.9 (8.6, 13.6)

0.55

45%

19, 63

0.003

Adjusted analysis ^♣^

38

60

889

Hazard Ratio=0.63

37%

6, 58

0.025

Open in a separate window

^\#^ excludes all visits after 3 months interruption of drug supply;

^\^^ Adherence could not be calculated for the 5 women who reported no
sex during their follow-up in the study

^\*^ All HIV infections = *Protocol defined HIV endpoints (n=98), + HIV
infection not meeting protocol definition (n=1 who did not have 2 RNA
PCR results), + HIV infections among ineligibly enrolled women (n=5), +
post-trial HIV infections (n=5), + window period HIV infections in
eligible women (n=8), + window period HIV infections in ineligibly
enrolled women (n=2).*

^♣^ Adjusted for the following baseline covariates: age, site, parity,
number of sexual partners (past 30 days), presence of STI, anal sex,
contraceptive method, HSV-2 antibody status, and condom use;

^•^ HSV-2 status is indeterminate in 4 women and missing in 5 women

### Gel adherence and sexual behavior

Over the entire duration of the study, 181 340 applicators were
dispensed and 95.2% of these were returned. Each month, study
participants returned an average of 6.0 used applicators, and reported a
mean of 5.0 sex acts. Coital frequency, gel adherence and condom use
during the trial were similar in the tenofovir and placebo gel arms. Gel
acceptability was high; 97.4% of the study participants found the gel to
be acceptable and 97.9% indicated that they would use it if it prevented
HIV.

Five women reported having no sex during follow-up in the study.
Adherence estimates based on applicator returns for the remaining 884
women indicate that, on average, 72.2% (median = 60.2%) of self-reported
sex acts in the last 30 days were covered by two doses of gel. In the
336 high gel adherers, HIV incidence was 54% lower (IRR 0.46, CI: 0.20,
0.94, p=0.025) in the tenofovir gel arm ( Table 2 ). In intermediate gel
adherers and low gel adherers, the HIV incidence reduction was 38%
(p=0.343) and 28% (p=0.303) respectively. The mean number of sex acts in
the high, intermediate and low gel adherers was 3.2, 5.0 and 6.7 per
month respectively.

Over the 30 months of follow-up, reported coital frequency declined
steadily ( Figure 3 ) from 7.2 sex acts per month in the first 6 months
to 3.1 sex acts per month in months 18-24 (p\<0.001). In women who did
not acquire HIV, overall median gel adherence was 61.3%, increasing from
55.0% in the first 6 months to 75.0% in months 18-24 (p\<0.001). In HIV
seroconvertors, overall median adherence (until product discontinuation
following HIV infection) was 59.2%, ranging from 56.9% in the first 6
months to 61.3% in months 18-24 (p=0.735). Overall, condoms were
reportedly used in 80.3% of sex acts; increasing from 78.5% in the first
6 months to 84.3% in months 18-24 (p\<0.001) ( Figure 3 ).

Figure 3

Trends in coital frequency, condom use and gel use (gel use by HIV
status) in relation to duration of follow-up in the CAPRISA 004
tenofovir gel trial

### Safety and pregnancy outcomes

There were 4692 adverse events reported during the study, with 94.3%
(838/889) of the study participants reporting at least one adverse
event. Adverse event rates were 3.55 per wy in the tenofovir and 3.44
per wy in the placebo gel arms (p=0.265). Women in the tenofovir gel arm
reported more instances of diarrhea ( Table 3 ) than those using placebo
gel (16.9% vs 11.0%, p=0.015). There were 39 serious adverse events,
including one death. In the 37 hepatitis B virus carriers, (20
randomized to tenofovir gel and 17 to placebo gel) there were two cases
of "hepatic flares" (ie. alanine aminotransferase \> 5 times the upper
limit of normal) in each arm. Further information on grading of the
hepatic, renal, and bone adverse events can be found in SOM .

### Table 3

Adverse events and other safety markers in the CAPRISA 004 tenofovir gel
trial

Tenofovir gel

Placebo gel

p-value

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\# events/ \# participants\
/ (% with ≥ 1 event)

\# events / \# participants\
/ (% with ≥ 1 event)

Number of adverse events

2419 / 423 / (95.1%)

2273 / 415 / (93.5%)

0.32

Deaths

0 / 0/ (0%)

1 / 1 / (0.2%)

0.50

Serious adverse events:

Total serious adverse events

23 / 21 /(4.7%)

16 / 16 / (3.6%)

0.50

Pregnancy related serious adverse events

8 / 8 / (1.8%)

8 / 8 / (1.8%)

1.00

Grade 3 ^\*^ adverse events

19 / 15 / (3.4%)

18 /16 / (3.6%)

0.86

Grade 4 ^\*^ adverse events

4 / 4 / (0.9%)

4 / 3 / (0.7%)

1.00

Common adverse events

Influenza

365 / 216 / (48.5%)

314 / 220 / (49.6%)

0.85

Vaginal discharge

203 / 156 / (35.1%)

239 /156 / (35.1%)

1.00

Vaginal candidiasis

156 /114 / (25.6%)

187 /130 / (29.3%)

0.28

Headache

126 / 93 / (20.9%)

133 /102 / (23.0%)

0.53

Urinary tract infection

135 / 100 / (22.5%)

120 /93 / (21.0%)

0.63

Diarrhea and gastrointestinal infections

91 / 75 / (16.9%)

65 / 49 / (11.0%)

0.02

Upper respiratory tract infections

162 / 114 / (25.6%)

145 / 100 / (22.5%)

0.31

Genital adverse events

Disrupted Epithelium e.g.genital ulceration

18 / 18 / (4.0%)

14 / 13 / (2.9%)

0.47

Intact epithelium, e.g. erythema

48 / 41 / (9.2%)

42 / 33 / (7.4%)

0.40

Urogenital symptoms e.g.menorrhagia

312 /210 / (47.2%)

394 / 238 / (53.6%)

0.06

Vaginal candidiasis

156 / 114 / (25.6%)

187 / 130 / (29.3%)

0.23

Other

182 / 131 / (29.4%)

176 / 123 / (27.7%)

0.60

Laboratory parameters - any abnormality post-randomization

*Hepatic*

\- aspartate aminotransferase (AST)

29 / 21 / (4.7%)

36 / 29 / (6.5%)

0.25

\- alanine transaminase (ALT)

42 / 33 / (7.4%)

50 / 40 / (9.0%)

0.38

*Renal*

\- raised creatinine

4 / 4 / (0.9%)

1 / 1 / (0.2%)

0.37

\- low potassium

119 / 95 /(21.4%)

99 / 83 / (18.7%)

0.36

\- raised sodium

54 / 48 / (10.8%)

43 / 41 / (9.2%)

0.50

*Hematological*

\- anemia

52 / 34 / (7.6%)

46 / 29 / (6.5%)

0.60

\- neutropenia

19 / 16 / (3.6%)

13 /11/ (2.5%)

0.44

*Bone*

\- low phosphate

79 / 62 / (13.9%)

65 / 51 / (11.5%)

0.31

\- low calcium

16 / 15 / (3.4%)

14 / 13 / (2.9%)

0.85

Fractures

3 / 2 / (0.5%)

3 / 3 / (0.7%)

0.69

Pregnancy rate per 100 women-years

3.2

4.7

0.18

Proportion of pregnancies resulting in live births

66.7

51.9

0.38

Open in a separate window

^\*^ Grade 3 and 4 adverse events refer to the grading for severity
according to the Division of AIDS Table for Grading Adult and Pediatric
Adverse Events, 2004

Five participants discontinued gel use for a total of 1.04 wy because of
adverse events; four were due to genital findings and one due to
congestive cardiac failure.

The overall pregnancy rate was 4.0 per 100 wy; 3.2 per 100 wy in the
tenofovir arm and 4.7 per 100 wy in the placebo arm (p=0.183) ( Table 3
). At the time of analysis, there were 6 ongoing pregnancies while 58.3%
of the remaining 48 pregnancies had resulted in a full-term live birth.
There were no significant differences in pregnancy outcomes by study arm
and there were no congenital anomalies. A total of 20.9 wy of follow-up
occurred while women were not using gel due to pregnancy.

### Viral load and tenofovir resistance

The mean log HIV viral load at the time when HIV seroconversion was
identified was 4.65 (Inter quartile range (IQR): 4.04 - 5.39) and 4.30
(IQR: 3.56 -- 5.17) log copies/ml in the tenofovir gel arm (n=38) and
placebo gel arm (n=60) respectively (p=0.147).

It is estimated that the HIV seroconvertors were exposed to gel
episodically for about 3-4 weeks post-infection and the resistance
assays (n=35) were performed on average 20 weeks after the estimated
date of infection. There were no tenofovir-related resistance mutations
(K65R, K70E) detected and none of the women had thymidine analogue
mutations (M41L, L210W, T215Y/F, D67N, K70R, and K219Q/E) or mutations
that confer multi-NRTI resistance.



## Discussion

Tenofovir gel reduced HIV infection by an estimated 39%. The protective
effect of coitally-related tenofovir gel use was evident soon after
initiation and peaked at 50% after 12 months of gel use. This protective
effect is evident irrespective of sexual behavior, condom use, herpes
simplex type 2 virus infection or urban/rural differences. A trend of
higher effectiveness was observed as gel adherence improved; high
adherers had a 54% lower HIV incidence rate in the tenofovir gel arm.

The observed level of effectiveness is dependent on both the efficacy of
the product and the participants\' willingness and ability to use it as
prescribed. Inadequate adherence is the most serious challenge to
obtaining an accurate estimate of product efficacy ( 28 ). To address
this, we implemented an intensive adherence support program with
motivational strategies which depended on reliable measurement of
adherence. Monitoring of this key behavior in the trial included an
objective count of used and unused applicators returned each month and
did not rely solely on self-reported use. Despite this adherence program
and high gel acceptability, about 40% of the women in this study had
below 50% gel adherence. Future trials will need to place greater
emphasis on enhancing and objectively measuring adherence, in light of
its substantial influence on the trial outcome.

In this study population, women with the highest gel adherence tended to
have the lowest reported coital frequency. Despite their lower coital
frequency, these women had HIV incidence rates comparable (in the
placebo gel arm) to those in women with much higher coital frequencies,
highlighting the importance of infrequent but very high-risk sex with
migrant men. The impact of coitally-related tenofovir gel was
substantial in this group, indicating its potential to alter the course
of the HIV epidemic in southern Africa, where young women engaging in
sex with migrant men is the key driver in the spread of HIV infection (
29 ). On a cautionary note, the effectiveness of coitally-related
tenofovir gel appeared to decline after 18 months, reasons for this are
unclear and factors, including the possibility of declining number of
gel applications and/or adherence over time, need further investigation.

HIV incidence rates observed in this study population were high, as
KwaZulu-Natal province is at the epicenter of South Africa\'s
"explosive" HIV epidemic ( 30 ). While the women in the tenofovir gel
arm had a substantially lower HIV incidence rate than the placebo arm,
they still had an unacceptably high HIV incidence rate, consistently
above 5 per 100wy. This highlights the need to seek higher levels of
adherence and effectiveness with tenofovir gel and/or to develop other
effective prevention strategies for use in combination with tenofovir
gel. Encouragingly, there was no evidence of risk compensation ( 31 ),
the phenomenon whereby individuals increase their HIV risk by reducing
their use of proven prevention modalities, such as condoms, in favor of
less effective or unproven prevention strategies. Instead, we observed
declining HIV incidence rates in the placebo gel arm. This may have been
due to their declining coital frequency and increasing condom use.
However, the consistently high levels of self-reported condom use in the
last sex act need to be interpreted cautiously as these may be affected
by inaccurate recall and may be indicative of condom use in only the
last sex act and not all sex acts.

We found no empiric evidence for the theoretical concern that tenofovir
gel may mask HIV infection and that withdrawal of tenofovir gel use
after study exit may lead to the unmasking of these infections.

Coitally-related tenofovir gel use was safe. There were no increases in
renal, hepatic, pregnancy-related or genital adverse events. The
increased risk of diarrhea in women using tenofovir gel may possibly
have been due to a local tenofovir effect; further investigation is
needed to establish the mechanism for this observed adverse effect. The
reported cases of diarrhea were mild and self-limiting, rarely requiring
medication.

There was no renal toxicity, the most important tenofovir-related safety
concern ( 32 ), though it should be noted that the study excluded women
with compromised creatinine clearance at enrollment. Increases in
hepatic flares, which have been reported upon cessation of oral
tenofovir use in hepatitis B-infected individuals ( 33 ), was not
observed in this study, possibly due to the low systemic absorption of
tenofovir from the gel formulation ( 17 ). No safety concerns were
identified in the 22 women exposed to tenofovir gel in early pregnancy,
providing further evidence to support the analysis of the Antiretroviral
Pregnancy Register ( 34 ) which showed no increases in congenital
anomalies. No tenofovir-related resistance was found in the 35 women
exposed to tenofovir gel early in acute HIV infection. Further studies
to identify tenofovir resistance at earlier timepoints post-infection,
in both the genital and systemic compartments, are needed.
Coitally-related tenofovir gel use showed no impact on viral load in HIV
seroconvertors.

This test-of-concept study had several limitations; the relatively small
sample size and the small number of study sites restrict the broad
generalizability of the results. The study\'s adherence program needed
to attain higher and sustained levels of adherence. The co-enrollment
challenge was a set back at the urban site. It did not, however, impact
on the estimated effectiveness of tenofovir gel when infections in
co-enrolled women were included in the analysis. It is not possible to
derive from this study any conclusions on the safety and effectiveness
of tenofovir gel for anal sex. Similarly, it is not possible to make any
conclusions on the effectiveness of tenofovir gel in relation to the
timing of gel applications because when gel was applied, BAT 24 was
usually followed.

Currently there are five large-scale trials assessing oral pre-exposure
prophylaxis with tenofovir or tenofovir-emtricitabine ( 35 ) in men who
have sex with men, intravenous drug users and heterosexual men and
women. One of these, the MTN 003 trial ( 36 ), is assessing the
effectiveness of daily tenofovir gel for HIV prevention. This critically
important study will provide urgently needed evidence on whether more
frequent dosing can improve adherence and effectiveness of tenofovir gel
without compromising safety. Additional studies are needed to
corroborate the findings of the CAPRISA 004 trial and to assess the
safety, effectiveness, adherence and/or cost advantages and
disadvantages of coitally-related tenofovir gel compared to daily
tenofovir in either the gel or oral formulation, for HIV prevention in
women.



## Conclusion

Coitally-related tenofovir gel appears safe and effective in preventing
HIV infection. Once these promising findings have been corroborated,
this antiretroviral microbicide could potentially fill an important HIV
prevention gap, especially for women unable to successfully negotiate
mutual monogamy or condom use.



## Supplementary Material

#### SOM material

Click here to view. ^(32K,\ docx)^



## Acknowledgements

We pay tribute to the women who participated in this trial; their
dedication and commitment made this study possible. We thank the Health
Department of the City of Durban, the traditional leadership of
Vulindlela, specifically, Nkosi Sondelani Zondi and Nkosi Nsikayezwe
Zondi; and members of the Community Advisory Boards at the Vulindlela
and eThekwini Research Clinics.

The CAPRISA 004 Tenofovir gel trial was supported by the Centre for the
AIDS Program of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA), the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), FHI (co operative
agreement \# GPO-A-00-05-00022-00, contract \# 132119), and LIFElab, a
biotechnology centre of the South African Department of Science and
Technology. Support from CONRAD for the product manufacturing and
packaging as well as support from Gilead Sciences for the tenofovir used
in the production of gel is gratefully acknowledged. We thank the US
National Institutes for Health\'s Comprehensive International Program of
Research on AIDS (CIPRA grant \# AI51794) and the Columbia
University-Southern African Fogarty AIDS International Training and
Research Programme (AITRP grant \# D43TW00231) for the research
infrastructure and training that made this trial possible.

The Trial Oversight Committee included: Q Abdool Karim, SS Abdool Karim,
(CAPRISA), L Claypool, J Manning, J Spieler (USAID), H Gabelnick
(CONRAD), B Okole, C Montague (LIFE *lab* ), J Rooney (Gilead Sciences),
W Cates, L Dorflinger, D Taylor (Family Health International), The study
monitors were: S Combes, C. Katz, L McNeil, and A Troxler and the DSMB
members were: E Bukusi, M Chen (independent statistician), K Dickson, C
Lombard, K Mayer (Chair), and S Self.



## Footnotes

**Author contributions and conflict of interest disclosures:**

The study was conceptualized by SSAK and QAK and designed by QAK, SSAK,
JAF, ACG, LEM, CB, ABMK, SS, SM, NA, and DT. Sections of the data was
gathered, analyzed and interpreted by JAF, LEM, CB, ABMK, KPM, ZO, TG,
SM, NA, and MM. The overall data was analysed and interpreted by QAK,
SSAK, ACG and DT. QAK, SSAK and ACG had full access to all of the data
in the study and take full responsibility for the integrity of the data
and the accuracy of the data analysis. LM conducted the resistance
testing. SSAK, QAK and CB took responsibility for writing the paper and
all co-authors contributed to critical revisions of the paper.

Quarraisha Abdool Karim is the Co-Principal investigator of the HPTN
Prevention Leadership Group (NIH/NIAID U01 AI068619). Salim S Abdool
Karim was the Protocol Chair of the HPTN 035 trial which was supported
by the National Institutes of Health (grant \# U01AI46749 and
U01AI068633). The other authors have no financial conflicts of interest.
By arrangement with Gilead Sciences and CONRAD, LIFE *lab* acquired a
voluntary non-exclusive royalty-free license for tenofovir gel for
low-cost distribution in Africa.

