<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

Skip to main content

<div>

<div>

Advertisement

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

-   plos.org
-   create account
-   sign in

</div>

<div>

-   -    Publish
    -    About
    -   Browse

    <div>

    </div>

-   

-   <div>

    <div>

    Search
    advanced search

    </div>

    </div>

-   

</div>

</div>

::: section
<div>

</div>
:::

::: {role="main"}
<div>

<div>

-   86

    <div>

    Save
    Total Mendeley and Citeulike bookmarks.

    </div>
-   43

    <div>

    Citation
    Paper\'s citation count computed by Dimensions.

    </div>
-   4,102

    <div>

    View
    PLOS views and downloads.

    </div>
-   2

    <div>

    Share
    Sum of Facebook, Twitter, Reddit and Wikipedia activity.

    </div>

<div>

<div>

Open Access

Peer-reviewed

<div>

Research Article

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

# HIV Drug Resistance Mutations in Proviral DNA from a Community Treatment Program

-   Anne Derache ,

    <div>

    </div>
-   Hyoung-Shik Shin,

    <div>

    </div>
-   Maya Balamane,

    <div>

    </div>
-   Elizabeth White,

    <div>

    </div>
-   Dennis Israelski,

    <div>

    </div>
-   Jeffrey D. Klausner,

    <div>

    </div>
-   Alexandra H. Freeman,

    <div>

    </div>
-   David Katzenstein

    <div>

    </div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

# HIV Drug Resistance Mutations in Proviral DNA from a Community Treatment Program

-   Anne Derache,
-   Hyoung-Shik Shin,
-   Maya Balamane,
-   Elizabeth White,
-   Dennis Israelski,
-   Jeffrey D. Klausner,
-   Alexandra H. Freeman,  ...
-   David Katzenstein

</div>

<div>

<div>

x

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

-   Published: January 30, 2015
-   https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430
-   

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

::: section
-   Article
-   Authors
-   Metrics
-   Comments
-   Media Coverage

<div>

<div>

-   Abstract
-   Introduction
-   Material and Methods
-   Results
-   Discussion
-   Acknowledgments
-   Author Contributions
-   References

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reader Comments
-   Figures

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

## Abstract

<div>

<div>

### Background

Drug resistance mutations archived in resting memory CD4+ cells may
persist despite suppression of HIV RNA to \<50 copies/ml. We sequenced
pol gene from proviral DNA among viremic and suppressed patients to
identify drug resistance mutations.

</div>

<div>

### Methods

The Peninsula AIDS Research Cohort study enrolled and followed over 2
years 120 HIV infected patients from San Mateo and San Francisco
Counties. HIV-1 pol genotyping by bulk sequencing was performed on 38
DNA and RNA from viremic patients and DNA only among 82 suppressed
patients at baseline. Antiretroviral susceptibility was predicted by
HIVDB.stanford.edu .

</div>

<div>

### Results

Among 120 subjects, 81% were on antiretroviral therapy and had been
treated for a median time of 7 years. Thirty-two viremic patients showed
concordant RNA and DNA genotypes (84%); the discordant profiles were
mainly observed in patients with low-level viremia. Among suppressed
patients, 21 had drug resistance mutations in proviral DNA (26%) with
potential resistance to one, two or three ARV classes in 16, 4 and 1
samples respectively.

</div>

<div>

### Conclusions

The high level of genotype concordance between DNA and RNA in viremic
patients suggested that DNA genotyping might be used to assess drug
resistance in resource-limited settings, and further investigation of
extracted DNA from dried blood spots is needed. Drug resistance
mutations in proviral DNA in 26% of subjects with less than 50 copies/ml
pose a risk for the transmission of drug resistant virus with virologic
failure, treatment interruption or decreased adherence.

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

## Figures

<div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

**Citation:** Derache A, Shin H-S, Balamane M, White E, Israelski D,
Klausner JD, et al. (2015) HIV Drug Resistance Mutations in Proviral DNA
from a Community Treatment Program. PLoS ONE 10(1): e0117430.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430

**Academic Editor:** D William Cameron, University of Ottawa, CANADA

**Received:** May 27, 2014; **Accepted:** December 25, 2014;
**Published:** January 30, 2015

**Copyright:** © 2015 Derache et al. This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited

**Data Availability:** HIV-1 PR and RT sequences recovered from PBMC and
viral RNA have been submitted to GenBank with the accession numbers
KJ69464 to KJ769641.

**Funding:** This work was funded by California HIV Research Program
CH05-SMCH-612. The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

**Competing interests:** The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

</div>

<div>

## Introduction

Antiretroviral therapy (ART) has changed the dynamic of the HIV epidemic
through suppression of HIV-1 RNA to undetectable plasma levels (\<50
copies/ml). However, latent HIV infection of CD4+ T cells, established
early after infection, necessitates lifelong ART \[ 1 -- 3 \]. Treatment
failure can lead to the selection of drug resistance mutations (DRM) in
the viral genome, which may be archived in the cellular reservoir. Even
when viral RNA (vRNA) is suppressed, DRM may be detected in proviral DNA
by sequencing extracted DNA from buffy coat, whole blood or peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) \[ 4 -- 7 \]. DRM archived in proviral
DNA may be expressed upon virologic failure, transmit drug resistant
virus and impact management of long-term ART \[ 8 -- 11 \]. Although it
is the current standard for assessing drug susceptibility, the plasma
genotype may underestimate drug resistance if treatment has been
interrupted or adherence compromised with the overgrowth of susceptible
virus in the absence of drug pressure \[ 12 -- 14 \].

Genotyping of the proviral reservoir may inform treatment decisions,
identify occult DRM and uncover community phylogenetic relationships.
Retrieving HIV resistance data from PBMC may be less expensive, but the
clinical significance of DRM in proviral DNA remains controversial \[ 9
, 15 -- 17 \]. Moreover, consensus genotype from plasma RNA or proviral
DNA does not detect DRM as minority variants \<20% \[ 18 -- 20 \].

Integrated HIV proviral DNA in T central memory cells can be
transcriptionally reactivated leading to virological failure \[ 1 , 2 ,
21 \]. Some studies show that HIV proviral populations may evolve
despite apparent suppression of viremia \[ 15 \], while others find
minimal changes in the composition of the proviral population during
suppressive treatment \[ 22 , 23 \]. The proviral reservoir is most
likely the source of the persistent expression of virus at \<50
copies/ml among patients on suppressive ART, despite the addition of
potent integrase inhibitors \[ 24 -- 26 \]. Whether these low levels of
HIV RNA result from the continued replication in reservoirs, tissues or
cells unaffected by ART, or are derived from activation of cells in the
latent reservoir is controversial, and both mechanisms may be occurring.

The resistance mutations detected by genotyping proviral DNA after
virologic failure have been found to closely mirror those obtained from
concomitant vRNA \[ 4 , 27 -- 29 \] unless there has been a treatment
interruption or poor adherence \[ 30 \]. Significantly fewer mutations
have been found in proviral DNA compared to historic vRNA genotypes
showing that some DRM are not archived or are not detectable in the
latent reservoir \[ 30 -- 32 \]. Conversely, the archived provirus
mutations in T cells may not be detected in plasma RNA in the absence of
drug pressure \[ 33 , 34 \].

Here, to assess the prevalence and the pertinence of DRM archived in
proviral DNA, 120 subjects, 82 suppressed to \<50 copies/ml and 38 with
68-171,000 copies/ml of plasma RNA, were sequenced from one or both
compartments. We identified virologic failures among suppressed patients
by evaluating the longitudinal relationship between archival DNA and RNA
drug resistance patterns. PBMC genotyping may identify transmission
linkages and add information to optimize ART among suppressed patients.

</div>

<div>

## Material and Methods

<div>

### Study population

One hundred and twenty HIV infected individuals were recruited from the
Peninsula AIDS Research Consortium clinic at the San Mateo County AIDS
Program and the San Francisco Public Health Department clinic, and
enrolled in a longitudinal study of drug resistance. Participants were
recruited from public health clinics during attendance for routine HIV
care.

</div>

<div>

### Ethics statements

Written informed consent was obtained for each participant and the study
was approved by the institutional review board "Administrative Panels
for the Protection of Human Subjects" from Stanford University for the
protocol 7861 "Antiretroviral Drug Resistance in Blood, Oral, and
Genital HIV-1: Implications for Pathogenesis and Transmission of Drug
Resistance and Secondary Prevention in Community Based Treatment
Programs".

</div>

<div>

### Sample collection

Study visits occurred every 6 months over a total of 2 years. Blood
specimens were obtained at each visit and transported to the laboratory
within 6 hours of collection. Plasma was removed after centrifugation
and PBMC were separated from whole blood by density gradient
centrifugation and stored at -70°C in 90% human serum, 10% Dimethyl
Sulfoxyde (DMSO). Viral load (VL) and CD4 measures were performed by the
clinical laboratories at San Mateo County hospital using Roche Cobas
Amplicor Monitor v1.5 (Roche Molecular Diagnostics, Inc., Branchburg,
NJ, USA) and BD FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA),
respectively.

</div>

<div>

### DNA and RNA extractions

Virus was concentrated from 1 ml of plasma by centrifugation for 20 min
at 20,000g to pellet the virus, 800μl of supernatant was discarded and
RNA extracted from the 200μl residua with QIAamp viral RNA Mini kit
(QIAGEN Inc., Hilden, Germany) as per the manufacturer's protocol. vRNA
was used as template for reverse transcription using SuperScript II
Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and random hexamer
primers, using cycling parameters of 10min at 25°C, 30min at 45°C and
15min at 70°C, and the RNA template degraded with RNAse H for 20 min at
37°C. DNA was extracted from pelleted PBMC using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini
kit (QIAGEN Inc.).

</div>

<div>

### Genotyping

At baseline, vRNA and proviral DNA, were sequenced from viremic patients
(n = 38) while suppressed patients (n = 82) provided only a proviral DNA
genotype. Only the vRNA was sequenced from patients who virologically
failed during follow-up (n = 11).

A 1,300-bp fragment encompassing the protease (PR) and the first 300
amino acids of the reverse transcriptase (RT) gene was generated from
DNA and cDNA for PCR amplification, followed by a nested PCR with 1 ^st^
round PCR primers; MAW26 (5´-TTGGAAATGTGGAAAGGAAGGAC-3´) and RT21
(5´-CTGTATTTCTGCTAT TAAGTCTTTTGATGGG-3´) and 2 ^nd^ round with PRO1
(5´-CAGAGCCAACAGCCC CACCA-3´) and RT20 (5´-CTGCCAGTTCTAGCTCTG CTTC-3´),
with Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen), 50pmoles of each primer,
2mM of Magnesium Chloride and 0.5mM of dNTPs. Forty cycles for the 1
^st^ and 35 for the 2 ^nd^ round of 94°C for 15s, 55°C for 20s and 72°C
for 2 min, then 10min at 72°C produced a nested PCR product, purified
using QIAquick PCR Purification kit (QIAGEN Inc.), as per manufacturer's
protocol. After quantification, 30ng were sequenced using the Big Dye
Terminator kit (Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, USA) and a set of 4
bidirectional primers by capillary electrophoresis on a 3130xl Genetic
Analyzer (Life Technologies).

</div>

<div>

### Sequence analysis

Sequences were assembled using Geneious R6 genetic analyzer (Biomatters,
Auckland, NZ) \[ 35 \]. DRM were identified using the Stanford HIV Drug
Resistance Database \[ 36 \]. A Neighbor Joining phylogenetic tree was
inferred with Phylip package \[ 37 \] with 2-Kimura parameters and
support values for the branching pattern were calculated from 1000
bootstrap replicates, visualized using FigTree \[ 38 \] and analyzed for
potential transmission clusters and linked infections. The frequency of
apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing, enzyme-catalytic, polypeptide-like 3G/F
(APOBEC3G/F) G to A mutations have been determined with the Calibrated
Population Resistance tool from the HIV Stanford Database for Quality
Assessment \[ 39 \]. More than 3 characteristic mutations in the RT and
2 in the PR genes associated with APOBEC3G/F activity were considered as
evidence for hypermutation. HIV-1 PR and RT sequences recovered from
PBMC and viral RNA have been submitted to GenBank with the accession
numbers KJ69464 to KJ769641.

</div>

</div>

<div>

## Results

<div>

### Baseline characteristics

One hundred and twenty subjects were enrolled: their demographic,
immunologic and virologic baseline characteristics are presented in
Table 1 . The median age of the study population was 44 years (ranging
from 20 to 64), 82% were male, 38% White, 28% African-American, 25%
Hispanic/Latino and 9% Asian/Pacific Island/Native American (reflecting
the ethnic and gender distributions of HIV infection in the San
Francisco Bay Area). Among all study participants, 97 (81%) had been on
ART for a median of 7 years. Of these patients, 41% remained on a
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitor (NNRTI) and 59% on a
Protease inhibitor (PI) based regimen.

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Download:

-   

    <div>

    PPT

    </div>

    <div>

    PowerPoint slide

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    PNG

    </div>

    <div>

    larger image

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    TIFF

    </div>

    <div>

    original image

    </div>

</div>

<div>

Table 1. Demographic, immunologic and virologic characteristics of the
study population n = 120.

</div>

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430.t001

</div>

At study entry 82 subjects (68%) were suppressed to \<50 copies/ml and
38 (32%) had \>50 copies/ml of plasma HIV-1 RNA with a median of 5,865
copies/ml. The median CD4+ cells count was 422/mm ^3^ among suppressed
patients and 305/mm ^3^ among viremic patients. Cumulative ART history
included exposure to TDF (85%), AZT and/or d4T (57%) and 57% and 66% had
received an NNRTI- or PI- based regimen respectively.

</div>

<div>

### Baseline resistance profiles in viremic patients

Overall, resistance profiles in both vRNA and proviral DNA were
concordant in 32/38 viremic patients at baseline (84%). Twenty-four
patients had wild-type genotype in both vRNA and DNA and 14 had DRM (see
Table 2 ); 12 had resistance mutations in vRNA and DNA with identical
DRM in 8/12 (some present in vRNA were absent in proviral DNA), and 2
had DRM only in DNA (see Fig. 1 and Table 2 ).

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Download:

-   

    <div>

    PPT

    </div>

    <div>

    PowerPoint slide

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    PNG

    </div>

    <div>

    larger image

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    TIFF

    </div>

    <div>

    original image

    </div>

</div>

<div>

Fig 1. Flow chart for the 120 patients enrolled in the study.

</div>

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430.g001

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Download:

-   

    <div>

    PPT

    </div>

    <div>

    PowerPoint slide

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    PNG

    </div>

    <div>

    larger image

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    TIFF

    </div>

    <div>

    original image

    </div>

</div>

<div>

Table 2. Drug resistance mutations profiles of 14 viremic patients at
baseline with drug resistance with their viral load and treatment status
at entry.

</div>

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430.t002

</div>

Among viremic patients, 18/38 (47%) had been on treatment at baseline
for a median of 4 years (ranging from 1 to 13 years). Half were
wild-type and the other half harbored resistance in vRNA and proviral
DNA, and 4 of them displayed DRM in vRNA that were not present in
proviral DNA (see Table 2 -- upper section).

Twenty viremic patients were not treated or had interrupted treatment
prior to enrollment, 15 of whom had wild-type genotype in both vRNA and
proviral DNA. Three of the twenty untreated patients had DRM in both
vRNA and DNA, and 2 had DRM only in proviral DNA (see Table 2 -- lower
section).

Discordant resistance profiles in vRNA and DNA were seen in 6 patients
with low viral load (mean of 697 copies/ml) in contrast with the
concordant genotypes among 32 with higher virus load (mean 31,252
copies/ml). Considering only viremic patients with VL \>1,000 copies/ml,
concordance between vRNA and proviral DNA was 97%. Finally, among 12
patients known to have been previously exposed to NNRTI, 4 had NNRTI
resistance mutations in proviral DNA while among 22 exposed to PI, only
3 had PI resistance mutations.

</div>

<div>

### Baseline resistance profiles in suppressed patients

Most of the 82 suppressed subjects were on treatment, 3 were reported to
be off of treatment and harbored wild-type genotypes in proviral DNA
(see Fig. 1 ). Twenty-one harbored archived DRM in proviral DNA (26%);
11 to NRTI, 5 to NNRTI only, 3 to NNRTI and NRTI, 1 to PI and NRTI, and
1 had DRM to all the 3 classes. Three of the subjects had NNRTI
resistance mutations in proviral DNA although previous NNRTI exposure
had not been recorded. Among the 12 subjects exposed to NNRTI, 6 (50%)
had NNRTI resistance mutations, while among 17 patients who have been
exposed to a PI only 2 (12%) harbored PI resistance mutations. Among the
61 without detectable DRM in proviral DNA, 5 (8%) had ≥3 APOBEC3G/F
signature mutations in *pol* gene with modestly higher CD4 cell counts
(mean value 435 vs 578 CD4 cells/mm ^3^ ).

</div>

<div>

### Emergence of viremia and virologic failure

Of the 82 study subjects with \<50 copies/ml at study entry, 11/82 (13%)
subsequently had a VL \>50 copies/ml at a mean of 39 weeks. Seven of the
11 had virologic failure with \>1,000 copies/ml (mean VL = 28,331
copies/ml), among them 3 had DRM in proviral DNA at baseline (upper
section of Table 3 ); 1 had an NRTI mutation (PID 10069), 1 had NNRTI
mutations (PID 10082) and 1 had both NRTI and NNRTI mutations (PID
10033). Two of them had the same DRM at virological failure and one had
wild-type genotype. Two patients among 4 with wild-type genotype at
baseline developed new DRM consistent with NNRTI based regimen (PIDs
10017 and 50002, middle section of Table 3 ). Among the 4 with low level
VF (mean VL = 160 copies/ml) (lower section of Table 3 ); one patient
had NRTI mutations at baseline and virologic failure (PID 10059), and
another one wild-type at baseline had a K70KR mixture arose at VF (PID
10018). The 2 other patients (PIDs 10010 and 20014) had a wild-type
genotype at both baseline and virological failure.

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Download:

-   

    <div>

    PPT

    </div>

    <div>

    PowerPoint slide

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    PNG

    </div>

    <div>

    larger image

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    TIFF

    </div>

    <div>

    original image

    </div>

</div>

<div>

Table 3. Drug resistance mutations profiles among 11 patients who were
suppressed at baseline (BL) and failed ART during the study follow-up.

</div>

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430.t003

</div>

</div>

<div>

### Phylogenetic analysis

A phylogenetic tree shown as Fig. 2 shows 2 pairs of sequences that
cluster with high bootstrap values. The first pair includes 2 men in
their late 30s, one heterosexual and one a former intravenous drug user
(IDU). The second pair of men in their late 30s, included a former IDU
who had sex with men and a heterosexual. These risk group
characteristics suggest that direct transmission was unlikely to occur,
but the clustering suggests a common source of infection.

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

Download:

-   

    <div>

    PPT

    </div>

    <div>

    PowerPoint slide

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    PNG

    </div>

    <div>

    larger image

    </div>
-   

    <div>

    TIFF

    </div>

    <div>

    original image

    </div>

</div>

<div>

Fig 2. Neighbor Joining tree with 2-Kimura parameters and 1,000
replicates.

</div>

Ethnicities are represent with different color codes: blue = White,
green = Hispanic, red = African American and black = Asian and others.
Bootstrap values for transmission clusters are showed. Drug resistance
mutations are also represented ● NRTI ■ NNRTI and ▲ PI.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430.g002

</div>

Another cluster distinguished from the tree includes 18 subjects. Their
median age is 50 years, and 16 are African-American, 15 are former IDU,
10 are female and 10 currently live in East Palo Alto. Despite a low
bootstrap value (430), this group shares common characteristics, which
highlight the dynamic of HIV epidemic among drug users and their sexual
partners in the 1990s \[ 40 \].

</div>

</div>

<div>

## Discussion

In summary, our study showed that proviral DNA and vRNA drug resistance
profiles of viremic subjects are concordant (84%, CI95%: 69--92%) and
are consistent with a median of 87% describe in the literature \[ 4 , 13
, 41 -- 45 \]. Discordance was most common among those with low virus
loads (50--1,000 copies/ml). Among those with \>1,000 copies/ml, there
was 97% concordance between mutations detected in viral RNA and PBMC
DNA.

RNA genotyping is the gold-standard template for HIV drug resistance
testing and requires RNA extraction, reverse-transcription followed by
PCR and sequencing reactions. vRNA is labile and genotyping protocols
mandate separation and storage of plasma at -70°C within 6 hours. In
addition, reverse transcription is the most critical and costly step in
RNA genotyping \[ 46 \]. While this study used cryopreserved PBMC, which
can be labor intensive to prepare and requires cold storage as well, DNA
may be extracted from whole blood or dried blood spots, and can be
transported at room temperature for several days. These results suggest
that proviral DNA sequencing may be a less resource intensive means to
assess drug resistance in resource-limited settings among patients
failing ART. Further studies should compare genotyping of vRNA and
proviral DNA extracted from dried blood spots to approximate to
"real-life" conditions in RLS. Cheaper, easier and reliable proviral DNA
genotyping may offer communities and clinics, distant from laboratory
facilities, improved clinical management of HIV patients in
decentralized treatment programs.

DRM, predominantly NRTI and NNRTI resistance mutations, were found in
PBMC proviral DNA among 26% of subjects with suppressed plasma RNA
levels who enrolled in a community treatment program in California.
Those with PBMC DRM had failed previous ART and were subsequently
suppressed on either a boosted PI or NNRTI based regimen. Stable
reservoirs of NRTI and NNRTI DRM (particularly M184V and K103N) in PBMC
are common at virologic failure of a first-line NNRTI based regimen \[
23 , 34 , 47 -- 51 \]. Archived DRM in proviral DNA despite suppression
of plasma RNA for years, raises concern about the potential for
transmitted drug resistance (TDR). Among the viremic subjects in this
study who denied previous NNRTI exposure, 2/16 (12.5%) had DRM in vRNA
and proviral DNA, which is consistent with levels of TDR associated with
acute infection and newly diagnosed patients in San Francisco \[ 52 \].
The NNRTI and NRTI mutations observed included K103N, G190A and K238T
and K65R, T215Y/F and M184V associated with rapid virologic failure on
NNRTI first-line regimens as well as transmission \[ 53 -- 56 \]. The
DRM observed in proviral DNA of suppressed subjects, may be expressed in
vRNA in the genital track, and thus potentially may be transmitted by
genital fluids \[ 57 \].

The significance of low level viremia (between 50 and 1,000 copies/ml)
remains controversial \[ 58 -- 61 \]. These values require confirmation,
and few authorities would recommend drug switching with VL measures
based on a single value between 50 and 1,000 copies/ml \[ 62 , 63 \].
Among samples with \<1,000 copies/ml, genotyping of PBMC and plasma
demonstrated DRM in 5 of 9 from both components, and those with DRM in
the plasma had similar DRM in PBMC DNA. Some discordance in specific
mutations (present in one compartment or the other) was observed, but
differences between plasma and PBMC did not identify new class
resistance nor were they sufficient to alter treatment considerations.
The sensitivity of detection of individual DRM in PBMC as compared to
plasma was 84% (32/38). There were 2 instances at low virus load (156
and 2770 copies/ml) where DRM found in PBMC (M184V, V82F) were not
expressed in plasma. This may be due to the re-emergence of wild-type
virus with waning drug pressure and early virologic failure. Also, 4
samples displayed DRM in vRNA that were absent from proviral DNA that
may be explained by the emergence of DRM not yet archived in proviral
DNA or present but at levels undetectable by bulk sequencing \<20%.
Further studies may be required to examine minor viral quasispecies in
proviral DNA with Next Generation Sequencing technologies.

In assigning clinical significance to DRM in PBMC, the study is limited
by the potency of modern suppressive regimens with relatively small
numbers with virologic failure over a mean follow-up of 46 weeks.
However the frequency of DRM at entry among suppressed individuals who
developed virologic failure 4/11 (36%) was similar to DRM found among
those who remained suppressed, 17/68 (25%), suggesting that DRM in PBMC
are not themselves a risk for virologic failure, and were only expressed
in a fraction of those with later virologic failure.

APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases restrict endogenous and exogenous
retroviruses by inducing G to A hypermutations in GG or GA dinucleotides
context. HIV-1 counteracts this antiviral activity through Vif. Kieffer
et al showed that hypermutated sequences comprise \>9% of archived
species in resting CD4+ cells \[ 64 \]. In our study 5/81 proviral
sequences were hypermutated (6%), consistent with recent studies \[ 65 ,
66 \], where E138K and M184I were the most common APOBEC3G/F associated
mutations. These were clearly defined as codons that were hypermutated
rather than mutations selected by 2 ^nd^ generation NNRTI and 3TC/FTC
respectively and can be attributed to APOBEC3G/F editing \[ 67 , 68 \].

Fourati et al demonstrated that the HIV-1 genome is often defective in
PBMC after a long-term HAART \[ 69 \]. In our study, subjects with
APOBEC3G/F signature mutations had higher median CD4 counts than those
without (578 vs 435 cells/mm ^3^ ) reflecting a robust immune response.
However, archival DRM, even in hypermutated sequences, can shape the
phenotype of the circulating viral population through recombination with
replication competent virus, leading to resistant strains \[ 67 \].
Defective HIV-1 quasispecies in the form of multiple drug-resistant
proviral DNA within cells can be rescued by superinfection with
different subtype variants of HIV-1, HIV-2 and SIV \[ 70 \].

Sequencing proviral DNA provided additional information about DRM, which
may impact treatment decisions, particularly in the setting of low level
viremia or suppression. Moreover, new information about phylogenetic
relationships and the prevalence of DRM, albeit as archival mutations
among suppressed individuals may identify historic transmission dynamics
in a community. Here we found linkage among African American men and
women in East Palo Alto, consistent with a reported peak in the IDU
epidemic more than 20 years ago in this community \[ 71 \]. Although the
ultimate duration and clinical significance of proviral resistance is
not fully defined, archival mutations often are expressed upon virologic
failure, potentially contributing to TDR, and archived mutations may
limit future treatment options. Further studies of proviral DNA
sequences and sequence analysis in monitoring ART are warranted.

</div>

<div>

## Acknowledgments

We want to acknowledge support for the PARC Peninsula AIDS Research
Collaboration from the California HIV Research Program and thank all the
study participants.

</div>

<div>

## Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: AD HSS. Performed the
experiments: AD HSS. Analyzed the data: AD HSS MB EW DI JDK AHF DK.
Wrote the paper: AD DK.

</div>

<div>

## References

1.   1. Chun TW, Engel D, Mizell SB, Ehler LA, Fauci AS (1998) Induction
    of HIV-1 replication in latently infected CD4+ T cells using a
    combination of cytokines. J Exp Med Jul 6;188(1):83--91. Erratum in:
    J Exp Med 1998 Aug 3;188(3):following 614. pmid:9653086
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
2.   2. Finzi D, Hermankova M, Pierson T, Carruth LM, Buck C, et
    al. (1997) Identification of a reservoir for HIV-1 in patients on
    highly active antiretroviral therapy. Science Nov
    14;278(5341):1295--300. pmid:9360927
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
3.   3. Siliciano JD, Kajdas J, Finzi D, Quinn TC, Chadwick K, et
    al. (2003) Long-term follow-up studies confirm the stability of the
    latent reservoir for HIV-1 in resting CD4+ T cells. Nat Med
    Jun;9(6):727--8. pmid:12754504
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
4.   4. Chew CB, Potter SJ, Wang B, Wang YM, Shaw CO, et al. (2005)
    Assessment of drug resistance mutations in plasma and peripheral
    blood mononuclear cells at different plasma viral loads in patients
    receiving HAART. J Clin Virol Jul;33(3):206--16. pmid:15911442
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
5.   5. Coovadia A, Hunt G, Abrams EJ, Sherman G, Meyers T, et
    al. (2009) Persistent minority K103N mutations among women exposed
    to single-dose nevirapine and virologic response to nonnucleoside
    reverse-transcriptase inhibitor-based therapy. Clin Infect Dis Feb
    15;48(4):462--72. pmid:19133804
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
6.   6. MacLeod IJ, Rowley CF, Thior I, Wester C, Makhema J, et
    al. (2010) Minor resistant variants in nevirapine-exposed infants
    may predict virologic failure on nevirapine-containing ART. J Clin
    Virol Jul;48(3):162--7. pmid:20427228
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
7.   7. Neogi U, Shet A, Sahoo PN, Bontell I, Ekstrand ML, et al. (2013)
    Human APOBEC3G-mediated hypermutation is associated with
    antiretroviral therapy failure in HIV-1 subtype C-infected
    individuals. J Int AIDS Soc Feb 25;16:18472. pmid:23443042
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
8.   8. Bi X, Gatanaga H, Ida S, Tsuchiya K, Matsuoka-Aizawa S, et
    al. (2003) Emergence of protease inhibitor resistance-associated
    mutations in plasma HIV-1 precedes that in proviruses of peripheral
    blood mononuclear cells by more than a year. J Acquir Immune Defic
    Syndr Sep 1;34(1):1--6. pmid:14501787
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
9.   9. Lambotte O, Chaix ML, Gubler B, Nasreddine N, Wallon C, et
    al. (2004) The lymphocyte HIV reservoir in patients on long-term
    HAART is a memory of virus evolution. AIDS May 21;18(8):1147--58.
    pmid:15166530
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
10.  10. Verhofstede C, Wanzeele FV, Van Der Gucht B, De Cabooter N,
    Plum J (1999) Interruption of reverse transcriptase inhibitors or a
    switch from reverse transcriptase to protease inhibitors resulted in
    a fast reappearance of virus strains with a reverse transcriptase
    inhibitor-sensitive genotype. AIDS Dec 24;13(18):2541--6.
    pmid:10630523
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
11.  11. Yerly S, Kaiser L, Race E, Bru JP, Clavel F, et al. (1999)
    Transmission of antiretroviral-drug-resistant HIV-1 variants. Lancet
    Aug 28;354(9180):729--33. pmid:10475184
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
12.  12. Deeks SG, Wrin T, Liegler T, Hoh R, Hayden M, et al. (2001)
    Virologic and immunologic consequences of discontinuing combination
    antiretroviral-drug therapy in HIV-infected patients with detectable
    viremia. N Engl J Med Feb 15;344(7):472--80. pmid:11172188
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
13.  13. Devereux HL, Loveday C, Youle M, Sabin CA, Burke A, et
    al. (2000) Substantial correlation between HIV type 1
    drug-associated resistance mutations in plasma and peripheral blood
    mononuclear cells in treatment-experienced patients. AIDS Res Hum
    Retroviruses Jul 20;16(11):1025--30. pmid:10933616
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
14.  14. Verhofstede C, Noë A, Demecheleer E, De Cabooter N, Van
    Wanzeele F, et al. (2004) Drug-resistant variants that evolve during
    nonsuppressive therapy persist in HIV-1-infected peripheral blood
    mononuclear cells after long-term highly active antiretroviral
    therapy. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Apr 15;35(5):473--83.
    pmid:15021312
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
15.  15. Falasca F, Montagna C, Maida P, Bucci M, Fantauzzi A, et
    al. (2013) Analysis of intracellular human immunodeficiency virus
    (HIV)-1 drug resistance mutations in multi-failed HIV-1-infected
    patients treated with a salvage regimen: 72-week follow-up. Clin
    Microbiol Infect Jul;19(7):E318--21. pmid:23438096
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
16.  16. Noë A, Plum J, Verhofstede C (2005) The latent HIV-1 reservoir
    in patients undergoing HAART: an archive of pre-HAART drug
    resistance. J Antimicrob Chemother Apr;55(4):410--2. pmid:15728140
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
17.  17. Turriziani O, Andreoni M, Antonelli G (2010) Resistant viral
    variants in cellular reservoirs of human immunodeficiency virus
    infection. Clin Microbiol Infect Oct;16(10):1518--24. pmid:20673260
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
18.  18. Mohamed S, Ravet S, Camus C, Khiri H, Olive D, et al. (2014)
    Clinical and analytical relevance of NNRTIs minority mutations on
    viral failure in HIV-1 infected patients. J Med Virol
    Mar;86(3):394--403. pmid:24248806
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
19.  19. Rowley CF, Boutwell CL, Lee EJ, MacLeod IJ, Ribaudo HJ, et
    al. (2010) Ultrasensitive detection of minor drug-resistant variants
    for HIV after nevirapine exposure using allele-specific PCR:
    clinical significance. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses Mar;26(3):293--300.
    pmid:20334564
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
20.  20. Stekler JD, Ellis GM, Carlsson J, Eilers B, Holte S, et
    al. (2011) Prevalence and impact of minority variant drug resistance
    mutations in primary HIV-1 infection. PLoS One 6(12):e28952.
    pmid:22194957
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
21.  21. Chun TW, Stuyver L, Mizell SB, Ehler LA, Mican JA, et
    al. (1997) Presence of an inducible HIV-1 latent reservoir during
    highly active antiretroviral therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A Nov
    25;94(24):13193--7. pmid:9371822
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
22.  22. Nottet HS, van Dijk SJ, Fanoy EB, Goedegebuure IW, de Jong D,
    et al. (2009) HIV-1 can persist in aged memory CD4+ T lymphocytes
    with minimal signs of evolution after 8.3 years of effective highly
    active antiretroviral therapy. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Apr
    1;50(4):345--53. pmid:19214126
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
23.  23. Palmisano L, Giuliano M, Galluzzo CM, Amici R, Andreotti M, et
    al. (2009) The mutational archive in proviral DNA does not change
    during 24 months of continuous or intermittent highly active
    antiretroviral therapy. HIV Med Sep;10(8):477--81. pmid:19459989
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
24.  24. Delaugerre C, Charreau I, Braun J, Néré ML, de Castro N, et al.
    ANRS 138 study group (2010) Time course of total HIV-1 DNA and
    2-long-terminal repeat circles in patients with controlled plasma
    viremia switching to a raltegravir-containing regimen. AIDS Sep
    24;24(15):2391--5. pmid:20683319
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
25.  25. Gandhi RT, Zheng L, Bosch RJ, Chan ES, Margolis DM, et al. AIDS
    Clinical Trials Group A5244 team (2010) The effect of raltegravir
    intensification on low-level residual viremia in HIV-infected
    patients on antiretroviral therapy: a randomized controlled trial.
    PLoS Med Aug 10;7(8). pmid:20824177
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
26.  26. McMahon D, Jones J, Wiegand A, Gange SJ, Kearney M, et
    al. (2010) Short-course raltegravir intensification does not reduce
    persistent low-level viremia in patients with HIV-1 suppression
    during receipt of combination antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect
    Dis Mar 15;50(6):912--9. pmid:20156060
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
27.  27. Banks L, Gholamin S, White E, Zijenah L, Katzenstein DA (2012)
    Comparing Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell DNA and Circulating
    Plasma viral RNA pol Genotypes of Subtype C HIV-1. J AIDS Clin Res
    Feb;3(2):141--147. pmid:23019537
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
28.  28. Geretti AM, Conibear T, Hill A, Johnson JA, Tambuyzer L, et al.
    SENSE Study Group (2014) Sensitive testing of plasma HIV-1 RNA and
    Sanger sequencing of cellular HIV-1 DNA for the detection of drug
    resistance prior to starting first-line antiretroviral therapy with
    etravirine or efavirenz. J Antimicrob Chemother Apr;69(4):1090--7.
    pmid:24284781
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
29.  29. Diallo K, Murillo WE, de Rivera IL, Albert J, Zhou Z, et
    al. (2012) Comparison of HIV-1 resistance profiles in plasma RNA
    versus PBMC DNA in heavily treated patients in Honduras, a
    resource-limited country. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet 3(1):56--65.
    pmid:22493752
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
30.  30. Imaz A, Olmo M, Peñaranda M, Gutiérrez F, Romeu J, et al.
    STOPAR study team (2013) Short-term and long-term clinical and
    immunological consequences of stopping antiretroviral therapy in
    HIV-infected patients with preserved immune function. Antivir Ther
    18(1):125--30. pmid:22805174
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
31.  31. Delaugerre C, Braun J, Charreau I, Delarue S, Nere ML, et al.
    ANRS 138-EASIER study group (2012) Comparison of resistance mutation
    patterns in historical plasma HIV RNA genotypes with those in
    current proviral HIV DNA genotypes among extensively treated
    patients with suppressed replication. HIV Med Oct;13(9):517--25.
    pmid:22416781
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
32.  32. Wirden M, Soulie C, Valantin MA, Fourati S, Simon A, et
    al. (2011) Historical HIV-RNA resistance test results are more
    informative than proviral DNA genotyping in cases of suppressed or
    residual viraemia. J Antimicrob Chemother Apr;66(4):709--12.
    pmid:21393164
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
33.  33. Bon I, Gibellini D, Borderi M, Alessandrini F, Vitone F, et
    al. (2007) Genotypic resistance in plasma and peripheral blood
    lymphocytes in a group of naive HIV-1 patients. J Clin Virol
    Apr;38(4):313--20. pmid:17306618
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
34.  34. Kabamba-Mukadi B, Duquenne A, Henrivaux P, Musuamba F, Ruelle
    J, et al. (2010) HIV-1 proviral resistance mutations: usefulness in
    clinical practice. HIV Med Sep;11(8):483--92. pmid:20163482
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
35.  35. Geneious. http://www.geneious.com/ .
36.  36. Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database.
    http://hivdb.stanford.edu .
37.  37. Felsenstein J (2008) PHYLIP Phylogeny Inference Package version
    3.6. Department of Genome Sciences University of Washington,
    Seattle. https://doi.org/10.14219/jada.archive.2008.0268
    pmid:25556087
38.  38. Vlad IM, Srinivasan BV, Raykar VC, Duraiswami R, Davis
    LS (2008) Automatic online tuning for fast Gaussian summation.
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
39.  39. Database SUHDR Calibrated Population Resistance tool.
    http://cpr.stanford.edu/cpr.cgi .
40.  40. Bowser BP, Worl CO, Fulliove RE, Fullilove MT (2014)
    Post-Script to the Crack Epidemic and Its Link to HIV. Journal of
    Equity in Health Vol. 3, No 1, 45--54.
    -   View Article
    -   Google Scholar
41.  41. Bon I, Alessandrini F, Borderi M, Gorini R, Re MC (2007)
    Analysis of HIV-1 drug-resistant variants in plasma and peripheral
    blood mononuclear cells from untreated individuals: implications for
    clinical management. New Microbiol Jul;30(3):313--7. pmid:17802917
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
42.  42. Günthard HF, Wong JK, Ignacio CC, Guatelli JC, Riggs NL, et
    al. (1998) Human immunodeficiency virus replication and genotypic
    resistance in blood and lymph nodes after a year of potent
    antiretroviral therapy. J Virol Mar;72(3):2422--8. pmid:9499103
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
43.  43. Monno L, Punzi G, Scarabaggio T, Saracino A, Brindicci G, et
    al. (2003) Mutational patterns of paired blood and rectal biopsies
    in HIV-infected patients on HAART. J Med Virol May;70(1):1--9.
    pmid:12629636
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
44.  44. Murillo W, de Rivera IL, Parham L, Jovel E, Palou E, et
    al. (2010) Prevalence of drug resistance and importance of viral
    load measurements in Honduran HIV-infected patients failing
    antiretroviral treatment. HIV Med Feb;11(2):95--103. pmid:19686436
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
45.  45. Soto-Ramirez LE, Rodriguez-Diaz R, Durán AS, Losso MH, Salomón
    H, et al. NISDI Perinatal Study Group (2008) Antiretroviral
    resistance among HIV type 1-infected women first exposed to
    antiretrovirals during pregnancy: plasma versus PBMCs. AIDS Res Hum
    Retroviruses Jun;24(6):797--804. pmid:18507526
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
46.  46. Prakash R (2009) DNA structure is more stable than RNA
    structure.
    http://www.brighthub.com/science/genetics/articles/16332.aspx .
47.  47. Hassan AS, Nabwera HM, Mwaringa SM, Obonyo CA, Sanders EJ, et
    al. (2014) HIV-1 virologic failure and acquired drug resistance
    among first-line antiretroviral experienced adults at a rural HIV
    clinic in coastal Kenya: a cross-sectional study. AIDS Res Ther Jan
    23;11(1):9. pmid:24456757
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
48.  48. Pillay S, Bland RM, Lessells RJ, Manasa J, de Oliveira T, et
    al. (2014) Drug resistance in children at virological failure in a
    rural KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, cohort. AIDS Res Ther Jan
    20;11(1):3. pmid:24444369
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
49.  49. Trotter AB, Hong SY, Srikantiah P, Abeyewickreme I, Bertagnolio
    S, et al. (2013) Systematic review of HIV drug resistance in
    Southeast Asia. AIDS Rev Jul-Sep;15(3):162--70. pmid:24002200
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
50.  50. Delaugerre C, Chaix ML, Blanche S, Warszawski J, Cornet D, et
    al. ANRS French Perinatal Cohort (2009) Perinatal acquisition of
    drug-resistant HIV-1 infection: mechanisms and long-term outcome.
    Retrovirology Sep 19;6:85. pmid:19765313
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
51.  51. Josefsson L, von Stockenstrom S, Faria NR, Sinclair E,
    Bacchetti P, et al. (2013) The HIV-1 reservoir in eight patients on
    long-term suppressive antiretroviral therapy is stable with few
    genetic changes over time. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A Dec
    17;110(51):E4987--96. pmid:24277811
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
52.  52. Jain V, Liegler T, Vittinghoff E, Hartogensis W, Bacchetti P,
    et al. (2010) Transmitted drug resistance in persons with
    acute/early HIV-1 in San Francisco, 2002--2009. PLoS One Dec
    10;5(12):e15510. pmid:21170322
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
53.  53. Cambiano V, Bertagnolio S, Jordan MR, Lundgren JD, Phillips
    A (2013) Transmission of drug resistant HIV and its potential impact
    on mortality and treatment outcomes in resource-limited settings. J
    Infect Dis Jun 15;207 Suppl 2:S57--62. pmid:23687290
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
54.  54. Imade GE, Sagay AS, Chaplin B, Chebu P, Musa J, et al. (2014)
    Short Communication: Transmitted HIV Drug Resistance in
    Antiretroviral-Naive Pregnant Women in North Central Nigeria. AIDS
    Res Hum Retroviruses Feb;30(2):127--33. pmid:24164431
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
55.  55. Kleyn TJ, Liedtke MD, Harrison DL, Lockhart SM, Salvaggio MR,
    et al. (2014) Incidence of Transmitted Antiretroviral Drug
    Resistance in Treatment-Naive HIV-1-Infected Persons in a Large
    South Central United States Clinic. Ann Pharmacother Jan 28.
56.  56. Lai CC, Hung CC, Chen MY, Sun HY, Lu CL, et al. (2012) Trends
    of transmitted drug resistance of HIV-1 and its impact on treatment
    response to first-line antiretroviral therapy in Taiwan. J
    Antimicrob Chemother May;67(5):1254--60. pmid:22302562
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
57.  57. Kantor R, Bettendorf D, Bosch RJ, Mann M, Katzenstein D, et al.
    ACTG A5077 Study Team (2014) HIV-1 RNA Levels and Antiretroviral
    Drug Resistance in Blood and Non-Blood Compartments from
    HIV-1--Infected Men and Women enrolled in AIDS Clinical Trials Group
    Study A5077. PLoS One Apr 3;9(4):e93537. pmid:24699474
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
58.  58. Greub G, Cozzi-Lepri A, Ledergerber B, Staszewski S, Perrin L,
    et al. Frankfurt HIV Clinic Cohort and the Swiss HIV Cohort
    Study (2002) Intermittent and sustained low-level HIV viral rebound
    in patients receiving potent antiretroviral therapy. AIDS Sep
    27;16(14):1967--9. pmid:12351960
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
59.  59. Macias J, Palomares JC, Mira JA, Torres MJ, García-García JA,
    et al. (2005) Transient rebounds of HIV plasma viremia are
    associated with the emergence of drug resistance mutations in
    patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Infect
    Oct;51(3):195--200. pmid:16230215
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
60.  60. Martinez V, Marcelin AG, Morini JP, Deleuze J, Krivine A, et
    al. (2005) HIV-1 intermittent viraemia in patients treated by
    non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor-based regimen. AIDS
    Jul 1;19(10):1065--9.
    -   View Article
    -   Google Scholar
61.  61. Tobin NH, Learn GH, Holte SE, Wang Y, Melvin AJ, et al. (2005)
    Evidence that low-level viremias during effective highly active
    antiretroviral therapy result from two processes: expression of
    archival virus and replication of virus. J Virol
    Aug;79(15):9625--34. pmid:16014925
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
62.  62. Africa NDoHS (2010) Clinical guidelines for the management of
    HIV & AIDS in adults and adolescents.
    http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/south_africa_art.pdf?ua=1 .
63.  63. Organization WH (March 2014 Supplement) To the 2013
    consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for
    treating and preventinh HIV infection.
    http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/104264/1/9789241506830_eng.pdf?ua=1
    .
64.  64. Kieffer TL, Kwon P, Nettles RE, Han Y, Ray SC, et al. (2005)
    G---\>A hypermutation in protease and reverse transcriptase regions
    of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 residing in resting CD4+ T
    cells in vivo. J Virol Feb;79(3):1975--80. pmid:15650227
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
65.  65. Fourati S, Malet I, Lambert S, Soulie C, Wirden M, et
    al. (2012) E138K and M184I mutations in HIV-1 reverse transcriptase
    coemerge as a result of APOBEC3 editing in the absence of drug
    exposure. AIDS Aug 24;26(13):1619--24. pmid:22695298
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
66.  66. Pace C, Keller J, Nolan D, James I, Gaudieri S, et al. (2006)
    Population level analysis of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
    hypermutation and its relationship with APOBEC3G and vif genetic
    variation. J Virol Sep;80(18):9259--69. pmid:16940537
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
67.  67. Kim EY, Bhattacharya T, Kunstman K, Swantek P, Koning FA, et
    al. (2010) Human APOBEC3G-mediated editing can promote HIV-1
    sequence diversification and accelerate adaptation to selective
    pressure. J Virol Oct;84(19):10402--5. pmid:20660203
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
68.  68. Mulder LC, Harari A, Simon V (2008) Cytidine deamination
    induced HIV-1 drug resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A Apr
    8;105(14):5501--6. pmid:18391217
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
69.  69. Fourati S, Lambert-Niclot S, Soulie C, Malet I, Valantin MA, et
    al. (2012) HIV-1 genome is often defective in PBMCs and rectal
    tissues after long-term HAART as a result of APOBEC3 editing and
    correlates with the size of reservoirs. J Antimicrob Chemother
    Oct;67(10):2323--6. pmid:22687892
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
70.  70. Quan Y, Xu H, Wainberg MA (2014) Defective HIV-1 quasispecies
    in the form of multiply drug-resistant proviral DNA within cells can
    be rescued by superinfection with different subtype variants of
    HIV-1 and by HIV-2 and SIV. J Antimicrob Chemother Jan;69(1):21--7.
    pmid:23963235
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar
71.  71. Watters JK (1994) Trends in risk behavior and HIV
    seroprevalence in heterosexual injection drug users in San
    Francisco, 1986--1992. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
    Dec;7(12):1276--81. pmid:7965639
    -   View Article
    -   PubMed/NCBI
    -   Google Scholar

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>
:::

<div>

<div>

Download PDF

</div>

<div>

-   Citation
-   XML

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

Print

</div>

<div>

Share

-   Reddit
-   Facebook
-   LinkedIn
-   Mendeley
-   Twitter
-   Email

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

Advertisement

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

### Subject Areas

<div>

?

</div>

<div>

Do these Subject Areas make sense for this article? Click the target
next to the incorrect Subject Area and let us know. Thanks for your
help!

</div>

-   RNA sequencing

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"RNA sequencing\"** applicable to this
    article? Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   Mutation

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"Mutation\"** applicable to this article? Yes
    No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   Genotyping

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"Genotyping\"** applicable to this article?
    Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   Blood plasma

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"Blood plasma\"** applicable to this article?
    Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   HIV

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"HIV\"** applicable to this article? Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   Antiretroviral therapy

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"Antiretroviral therapy\"** applicable to
    this article? Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   Blood

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"Blood\"** applicable to this article? Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>
-   HIV-1

    <div>

    Is the Subject Area **\"HIV-1\"** applicable to this article? Yes No

    Thanks for your feedback.

    </div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>
:::

<div>

<div>

-   Publications
-   PLOS Biology
-   PLOS Climate
-   PLOS Complex Systems
-   PLOS Computational Biology
-   PLOS Digital Health
-   PLOS Genetics
-   PLOS Global Public Health

</div>

<div>

-   
-   PLOS Medicine
-   PLOS Mental Health
-   PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
-   PLOS ONE
-   PLOS Pathogens
-   PLOS Sustainability and Transformation
-   PLOS Water

</div>

<div>

-   Home
-   Blogs
-   Collections
-   Give feedback
-   LOCKSS

</div>

<div>

-   Privacy Policy
-   Terms of Use
-   Advertise
-   Media Inquiries
-   Contact

</div>

</div>

<div>

PLOS is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) corporation, #C2354500, based in San
Francisco, California, US

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>
