#  Epidemiological and molecular characteristics of HIV infection among money boys and general men who have sex with men in Shanghai, China

## Abstract

To examine and compare the epidemiological and molecular characteristics
of HIV infection between money boys (MBs) and general men who have sex
with men (MSM) in Shanghai, China. Using a venue-based sampling
strategy, a total of 535 MSM including 226 MBs and 309 general MSM were
recruited to participate in a cross-sectional survey including a
face-to-face questionnaire interview and HIV testing. Genotyping of
HIV-1 *pol* gene was performed for HIV-positive participants. Compared
with general MSM, MBs reported more sexual partners, more alcohol and
drug use and more sex after alcohol or drug use. HIV prevalence was
10.7% overall, 14.6% for MBs and 7.8% for general MSM ( *p* = 0.011).
Two independent multiple logistic regression analyses indicated that HIV
infection was positively associated with non-Han ethnicity (Odds Ratio
\[OR\] = 4.79, 95% Confidence Interval \[CI\]: 1.08--21.28) and sex
after drug use in the past 6 months (OR = 3.59, 95% CI: 1.50--8.61)
among MBs, and with sex after drug use in the past 6 months (OR = 3.38,
95% CI: 1.10--10.34) among general MSM as well. HIV-1 *pol* gene was
successfully amplified and sequenced for 52 (91.2%) of HIV-positive
participants. Of them, 53.8% were genotyped as CRF01_AE, 36.5% as
CRF07_BC and 9.6% as subtype B. Two CRF01_AE subtype-infected
participants (3.8%), a 50 years old MB and a 24 years old general MSM,
harbored viruses with a M46L mutation conferring resistance to protease
inhibitors (PI). MSM particularly MBs in Shanghai, China were at high
risk of HIV infection, underscoring an urgent need for joint
intervention efforts for drug use and sexual behaviors. HIV drug
resistance surveillance is also warranted although the relatively low
prevalence of HIV drug resistance implies the effectiveness of current
antiretroviral treatment regimen.





## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Participants and procedures

This cross-sectional survey was conducted by using a venue-based
(including bar, bathhouse and internet) sampling design to recruit study
subjects in Shanghai, China from April, 2012 to March, 2013. To be
eligible, participants must have been at least 18 years old,
self-identified as a male, and engaged in anal and/or oral sex with
another man in the past 12 months, ART-naïve (for those with known
HIV-positive status) and been able to provide written consent in
Mandarin. Face-to-face questionnaire interviews were administered by
public health practitioners who were experienced in working with MSM and
were trained in questionnaire interviews. Each questionnaire interview
took approximately 30--45 min. Participants were given \$30 for
reimbursement. A written consent form was obtained from each participant
who also received a copy of the signed consent form. This study was
approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Emory University,
the United States of America and the IRB of Fudan University, China.

### 2.2. Measures

#### 2.2.1. Demographics

Personal demographic characteristics included age, ethnicity, education
level, marital status, occupation, monthly individual income, and
self-identified sexual orientation were collected.

#### 2.2.2. Sexual behaviors

Participants were asked how many male and female sex partners they had
in the past 30 days. They were also asked the following behaviors during
the past 6 months prior to the interview: ever having anal sex and ever
not using condoms during anal sex, ever having sexual sex after drinking
alcohol, and ever having sex after using drugs. Other variables included
age at first sex with man, history of HIV testing (ever vs. never) and
receiving a HIV diagnosis (positive vs. negative).

### 2.3. HIV testing

Serum samples were screened for anti-HIV IgG antibody using an ELISA
technique (Kehua Biotechnology Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) according to
the manufacturer's instructions. Any sample that screened positive for
HIV was subject to another antibody testing with another HIV diagnostic
kit using ELISA tests, the sample was then confirmed by a western blot
assay (HIV BLOT 2.2; Genelabs Diagnostics Pte Ltd., Singapore).

### 2.4. HIV viral RNA extraction and amplification

Plasma was separated from the whole blood within two hours after
collection and stored at −70 °C until use. HIV Viral RNA was extracted
from plasma samples using High Pure Viral Nucleic Acid Kit (Roche Inc.,
Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The
HIV-1 *pol* gene (protease 1--99 amino acids and part of reverse
transcriptase 1--300 amino acids) was amplified by using an in-house
nested reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method.
The target sequence was amplified with TaKaRa One--Step RNA PCR kit
(TaKaRa Biotechnology, Dalian, China) using primers MAW26
(5′-TTGGAAATGTGGAAAGGAAGGAC-3′) and RT21
(5′-CTGTATTTCTGCTATTAAGTCTTTTGATGGG-3′) in a 25 μl reaction. Cycling
conditions were 50 °C for 30 min and 94 °C for 5 min in first-round
RT-PCR, followed by 35 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s,55 °C for 30 s,72 °C for
2 min, and an extension at 72 °C for 10 min. The nested PCR was
performed using Takara Ex Taq PCR kit (TaKaRa Biotechnology, Dalian,
China), using primers PRO-1 (5′-CAGAGCCAACAGCCCCACCA-3′) and RT20
(5-CTGCCAGTTCTAGCTCTGCTTC-3′)in a 50 μl reaction and the cycling
conditions were 94 °C for 5 min in first-round RT-PCR, followed by
30 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s,63 °C for 30 s,72 °C 2.5 min, and an
extension at 72 °C for 10 min.

### 2.5. Genotyping of HIVDR

Bi-directional sequences were obtained in the region of interest for all
samples analyzed in this study. For quality control, mutations presented
as amino acid mixtures were identified only if the corresponding
nucleotide mixture was present in the sequences of both DNA strands. The
sequences of those amplified fragments were edited using the software
Lasergene DNASTAR (DNASTAR Inc., Wisconsin, USA). HIVDR and the
susceptibility of the viruses to ARTs were interpreted with both the
Stanford HIV Drug Resistance Database ( http://hivdb.stanford.edu
) and the Surveillance Drug Resistance Mutations (SDRM) list recommended
by WHO ( Bennett et al., 2009 ).

### 2.6. HIV-1 Subtyping

The determination of HIV-1 subtypes was accomplished by submitting the
obtained *pol* sequences including the entire PR gene and a part of RT
gene (1316 bp) to the HIV BLAST subtyping tool ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov
) for phylogenetic analysis. The subsequent detailed phylogenetic
analysis was done using Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA)
software, version 5.1. The recommended HIV-1 subtype reference sequences
available at the Los Alamos HIV sequences database ( www.hiv.lanl.gov
) were used. The phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using the
neighbor-joining method based on the Kimura two-parameter distance model
with 1000 bootstrapped data-sets.

### 2.7. Data analysis

SPSS version 17.0 was utilized for statistical analyses. Chi-square test
or Fisher's exact were used where appropriate to compare the differences
in sociodemographic characteristics and sexual behaviors between MBs and
general MSM. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression were
performed separately for MBs and general MSM to examine correlates of
HIV-1 infection. HIVDR mutations were grouped according to whether they
could potentially confer resistance to nucleotide reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTI), non-nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(NNRTI) or protease inhibitors (PI). A *p* -value \< 0.05 was considered
to be significant.

::: section

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Sociodemographic characteristics

A total of 535 participants including 226 MBs and 309 general MSM were
included. As shown in Table 1 , the majority of them were younger than
35 years (71.6%), non-Shanghai residents (76.3%), ethnic Han (94.6%),
had monthly income less than 5000 Yuan RMB (approximately US\$850,
66.5%), and were self-identified as gay (64.1%). MBs and general MSM
were statistically different in age, residency status, education and
monthly income ( *p* \< 0.05).

### 3.2. Sexual behaviors

Thirty-eight (16.8%) MBs reported having had sex with a female partner
in the past 30 days, including 5.8% (8/140) of gay-identified MBs and
34.9% (30/86) of non-gay-identified MBs (Chi-square test, *X* ^2^
= 31.80, *p* \< 0.001); whereas 63 (20.4%) general MSM reported having
had sex with a female partner in the past 30 days, including 8.0%
(16/203) of gay-identified general MSM and 44.3% (47/106) of
non-gay-identified general MSM (Chi-square test, *X* ^2^ = 55.60, *p*
\< 0.001).

The mean age at first sex with man was 20.9 years (SD: 6.0) overall and
was not significantly different between MBs (20.6 ± 6.0) and general MSM
(21.2 ± 6.0) ( *t* -test = −1.22, *p* = 0.224). Compared with general
MSM, MBs were more likely to have a larger number of male sex partners
in the past 30 days, and were more likely to report having had anal sex,
sex after drinking alcohol and sex after using drugs in the past
6 months ( Table 1 ). About 354 (71.8%) participants have tested for HIV
prior to the interview, but only 7 reported a HIV-positive result.

### 3.3. Prevalence and correlates of HIV infection

The prevalence of HIV infection was 10.7% (57/535) overall, 14.6%
(33/226) for MBs and 7.8% (24/309) for general MSM (Chi-square test, *X*
^2^ = 6.41, *p* = 0.011). Table 2 presented results of logistic
regression analyses. Univariate analysis indicated that among MBs, HIV
infection was significantly associated with age, ethnicity,
self-identified sexual orientation, and sex after using drugs in the
past 6 months. Multivariate analysis indicated that after adjusting for
potential confounders, HIV infection was positively associated with
non-Han ethnicity (OR 4.79, 95% CI: 1.08--21.28) and sex after using
drugs in the past 6 months (OR 3.59, 95% CI: 1.50--8.61).

Among general MSM, univariate analysis demonstrated that HIV infection
was significantly associated with monthly income and sex after using
drugs in the past 6 months. After adjusted for potential confounders in
the multivariate analysis, general MSM who had sex after using drugs in
the past 6 months were more likely to be infected with HIV (OR 3.38, 95%
CI: 1.10--10.34) than others.

### 3.4. HIV molecular characteristics

#### 3.4.1. HIV-1 subtypes

Of 57 HIV-1 positive participants, 52 (91.2%) including 30 MBs and 22
general MSM were successfully genotyped for the HIV-1 *pol* gene. Among
them, 28 (53.8%) including 15 MBs and 13 general MSM were infected with
CRF01_AE, 19 (36.5%) including 14 MBs and 5 general MSM were infected
with CRF07_BC, and 5 (9.6%) including 1 MB and 4 general MSM were
infected with subtype B. Phylogenetic trees of these HIV subtypes are
presented in Fig. 1 .

#### 3.4.2. HIVDR mutations

Among 52 participants with their HIV-1 *pol* gene sequenced, 2 (3.8%)
were found to harbor viruses with drug resistance mutations. Both were
of CRF01_AE subtype with PI-related major mutation, M46L, which confers
resistance to nelfinavir (NFV) and other protease inhibitors. One was a
50 years old money boy, and another was a 24 years old general MSM. No
NRTI-or NNRTI-related drug resistance mutations were found.

Several minor mutations were detected in the protease (PR) region of the
*pol* gene: L10I (3.8%), V11I (1.9%), L33F (1.9%) and A71T/V (17.3%);
and several others were detected in the reverse transcriptase (RT)
region of the *pol* gene: T69A (1.9%), V118I (11.5%), L210 M (1.9%),
V179I (11.5%) and K101Q (1.9%).

## 4. Discussion

HIV prevalence among general MSM in Shanghai was comparable with that in
Beijing, the capital city of China, but was lower than that in Sichuan
and Guangxi provinces in Southwest China ( Song et al., 2013 , Tao et
al., 2013 , Zhao et al., 2014 ). However, HIV prevalence among MBs was
almost two times higher than that among general MSM. This was consistent
with findings from previous studies in China ( Bai et al., 2014 , Feng
et al., 2010a , Feng et al., 2010b ), further suggesting that MSM
especially those engaging in commercial sex are at highest risk of HIV
infection.

MBs with a non-Han ethnic minority were at higher risk of HIV infection
than those with Han ethnicity which is the main ethnicity of Chinese.
But such differential HIV risks between different ethnicities were not
observable among general MSM. This is very likely due to the fact that
most general MSM in the study were local Shanghai residents whereas most
MBs were non-Shanghai migrants. Some of these MBs might come from
provinces where certain ethnic minorities were at a disproportionately
high risk of HIV infection ( Ministry of Health in People's Republic of
China, 2011 ).

Although there is little research examining drug use and HIV infection
among Chinese MSM, international research consistently documents the
relationships between drug use, sexual risk taking, and the transmission
of HIV and other STIs ( Carey et al., 2009 , Mathers et al., 2008 , Van
Tieu and Koblin, 2009 ). In the present study, having sex after using
drugs was positively associated with HIV infection among both MBs and
general MSM. This underscores urgent needs of joint intervention efforts
for drug use and risky sexual behaviors among MSM in China. Furthermore,
given that MBs use drugs more often and have sex more often after using
drugs than general MSM ( Chow et al., 2012 , Nehl et al., 2015 ), such
intervention efforts should be oriented differentially for MBs and
general MSM.

The B, CRF-01AE and CRF-BC are the predominant HIV subtypes in China (
Yu et al., 2011 ), but there are some variations in different
transmission routes. For IDUs or heterosexually transmitted infections,
subtype C ( Chen et al., 2012a ) or CRF-08BC/07BC ( Chen et al., 2013 )
was found to be the predominant strain in Yunnan province. For Chinese
MSM, studies in different regions in China showed that CRF01_AE was
currently the predominant HIV subtype among MSM ( Chen et al., 2013 ,
Han et al., 2013a , Han et al., 2013b , Li et al., 2011 , Li et al.,
2012 , Zhao et al., 2011 ), as our data indicated. But we found that
CRF07_BC was more common than subtype B. This was also consistent with
other studies indicating a decreasing trend of subtype B and increasing
trend of CRF01_AE and CRF07_BC among Chinese MSM ( Chen et al., 2014 ,
Han et al., 2013a , Han et al., 2013b , Wang et al., 2013 ). Prior
studies have also identified some types of novel HIV-1 circulating
recombinant forms (CRF) among Chinese MSM who were exposed to multiple
HIV-1 variants or subtypes through risky sexual behaviors ( Chen et al.,
2012b , Han et al., 2013a , Han et al., 2013b , Wei et al., 2013 ). We
didn't identify any novel HIV-1 CRF, probably due to a relatively small
sample of HIV-positive participants. However, given high prevalence of
risky sexual behaviors among MSM particularly MBs, the occurrence of
novel HIV-1 CRF in this high risk population is foreseeable.

Compared with other regions in China ( Chen et al., 2014 , Dai et al.,
2014 , Li et al., 2013 ), the prevalence of HIVDR among the newly
diagnosed HIV-infected MSM in this study was relatively low, suggesting
that current ART regimen be likely to remain effective for HIV-infected
MSM in Shanghai. However, given the complexity of sexual behavioral
networks of MSM, the occurrence of HIVDR following ART scaling up in
this population cannot be neglected and warrants routine HIVDR
surveillance. Furthermore, although PIs are not included in the
first-line free ART and its use is very limited in China, only
PI-related HIVDR was identified in the study. This may suggest a
possibility of sexual promiscuity of the MSM participants with MSM from
other regions or countries where PIs are used widely.

The study has certain limitations. First, subjects were recruited
through venue-based sampling, which may have led to selection bias.
Second, the sensitive nature of the questions related to sexual
behaviors might lead to information bias due to the social desirability,
for example, underreporting the number of sexual partners and over
reporting the rates of condom use. Third, our data may not fully
represent the molecular characteristics of HIV infection among the MSM
population in Shanghai due to the relatively small number of HIV
positive participants.

Despite these potential limitations, the study findings have important
implications for HIV prevention intervention and treatment for MSM in
Shanghai, China. First of all, although both MBs and general MSM are at
high risk of HIV infection, these two groups are different in many
aspects of HIV risks and are therefore subject to differential and
tailored prevention and intervention efforts. Second, the prevalence of
HIVDR was relatively low and the identifiable HIVDR mutation was related
only to PIs which are not among the inventory of first line
antiretroviral drugs in China, suggesting that current ART regimens
remain effective for this population. However, given high rates of
reported multiple sex partners and high prevalence of HIV infection
among the MSM population, there is urgent need of HIV prevention
programs as well as drug resistance surveillance among this population.

::: section

## 5. Sequence data

GenBank accession numbers are KP418582 to KP418633.
