

## Request Username

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

Email\*

Close


## Create a new account

Email

Returning user


## Change Password

Old Password

New Password

close

-    Login
-    Register

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-

Email\*

Password\*

Forgot password? Reset it here

Keep me logged in

Fields with \* are mandatory

Don\'t have an account? Create one here

-

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your password?

Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset
instructions

Email\*

Cancel

CLOSE

This Journal

Enter words / phrases / DOI / ISBN / keywords / authors / etc

Search Search

Advanced search

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

Suggested Terms:

-   open access policy
-   peer review at ASM
-   what it costs to publish with ASM
-   calls for editors
-   asm journals collections

0

Login

Skip main navigation

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

JOURNALS

0

Login

::: {role="main"}

1.   ASM Journals
2.   Journal of Virology
3.   Vol. 89, No. 6
4.   Differential Effects of the G118R, H51Y, and E138K Resistance
Substitutions in Different Subtypes of HIV Integrase

Advertisement

Research Article

20 February 2015

Share on

-
-
-
-


# Differential Effects of the G118R, H51Y, and E138K Resistance Substitutions in Different Subtypes of HIV Integrase

Authors : Peter K. Quashie , Maureen Oliviera , Tamar Veres , Nathan
Osman , Ying-Shan Han , Said Hassounah , Yolanda Lie , Wei Huang ,
Thibault Mesplède , Mark A. Wainberg Authors Info & Affiliations

DOI : https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.03353-14

52
2,222

### Metrics

###  Total Citations   52

###  Total Downloads   2,222

Cite

PDF/EPUB

-    Contents

JVI

Volume 89 , Number 6 \
15 March 2015

-   ABSTRACT
-   INTRODUCTION
-   MATERIALS AND METHODS
-   RESULTS
-   DISCUSSION
-   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
-   REFERENCES

-
-    Information & Contributors
-    Metrics & Citations
-    References
-    Figures and Media
-    Tables
-    Share

::: section

## ABSTRACT

Dolutegravir (DTG) is the latest antiretroviral (ARV) approved for the
treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. The G118R
substitution, previously identified with MK-2048 and raltegravir, may
represent the initial substitution in a dolutegravir resistance pathway.
We have found that subtype C integrase proteins have a low enzymatic
cost associated with the G118R substitution, mostly at the strand
transfer step of integration, compared to either subtype B or
recombinant CRF02_AG proteins. Subtype B and circulating recombinant
form AG (CRF02_AG) clonal viruses encoding G118R-bearing integrases were
severely restricted in their viral replication capacity, and
G118R/E138K-bearing viruses had various levels of resistance to
dolutegravir, raltegravir, and elvitegravir. In cell-free experiments,
the impacts of the H51Y and E138K substitutions on resistance and enzyme
efficiency, when present with G118R, were highly dependent on viral
subtype. Sequence alignment and homology modeling showed that the
subtype-specific effects of these mutations were likely due to
differential amino acid residue networks in the different integrase
proteins, caused by polymorphic residues, which significantly affect
native protein activity, structure, or function and are important for
drug-mediated inhibition of enzyme activity. This preemptive study will
aid in the interpretation of resistance patterns in dolutegravir-treated
patients.

**IMPORTANCE** Recognized drug resistance mutations have never been
reported for naive patients treated with dolutegravir. Additionally, in
integrase inhibitor-experienced patients, only R263K and other
previously known integrase resistance substitutions have been reported.
Here we suggest that alternate resistance pathways may develop in non-B
HIV-1 subtypes and explain how "minor" polymorphisms and substitutions
in HIV integrase that are associated with these subtypes can influence
resistance against dolutegravir. This work also highlights the
importance of phenotyping versus genotyping when a strong inhibitor such
as dolutegravir is being used. By characterizing the G118R substitution,
this work also preemptively defines parameters for a potentially
important pathway in some non-B HIV subtype viruses treated with
dolutegravir and will aid in the inhibition of such a virus, if
detected. The general inability of strand transfer-related substitutions
to diminish 3′ processing indicates the importance of the 3′ processing
step and highlights a therapeutic angle that needs to be better
exploited.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

During the past 30 years, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has
infected \>68 million people, killing ∼34 million ( 1 ). The advent of
combination antiretroviral (ARV) regimens in 1995 has played a key role
in reducing HIV/AIDS-related deaths and prolonging the life span of
people living with HIV ( 2 ).

The integration of viral DNA into the human genome prevents the facile
eradication of HIV from the cells of infected individuals, even during
suppressive ARV therapy ( 3 ). Additionally, HIV quickly develops drug
resistance in the face of suboptimum drug pressure (as happens in poorly
adherent patients or due to low drug bioavailability) ( 4 ), and this is
facilitated by the high mutation and recombination rates of HIV reverse
transcriptase ( 5 ). The inability to eradicate HIV combined with high
rates of drug resistance have necessitated the ongoing development of
new potent ARVs with novel targets, unique resistance patterns, and/or
better bioavailability in a context of simplified dosing ( 6 , 7 ).

Raltegravir (RAL) was the first approved drug to target the HIV
integrase (IN) enzyme. RAL acts as an integrase strand transfer
inhibitor (INSTI) and was approved in 2007 ( 8 ), followed by a second
INSTI, termed elvitegravir (EVG), in 2012 ( 9 ). These two compounds as
well as dolutegravir, the most recently approved INSTI (2013) ( 10 ),
target the strand transfer step of integration by three binding
mechanisms: (i) chelation of active-site divalent cations (Mg ^2+^ or Mn
^2+^ ), (ii) pi-stacking interactions between INSTI halobenzyl groups
and the viral long terminal repeat (LTR) base immediately upstream of
CA-OH, and (iii) interactions between INSTIs and specific IN residues (
11 ). Both RAL and EVG are associated with a low barrier to resistance
in both treatment-naive and -experienced patients and share many of the
same resistance mutations, hence establishing the problem of
cross-resistance among these drugs ( 12 -- 15 ).

In contrast, no resistance mutations have yet been associated with DTG
in drug-naive patients, after \>5 years of experience in clinical trials
( 7 , 13 ). Tissue culture selection studies identified two DTG
mutational pathways for resistance, initiated by either the R263K
substitution in subtype B and circulating recombinant form AG (CRF02_AG)
or the G118R substitution in subtype C and CRF02_AG ( 16 ). We showed
that R263K and a subsequent H51Y substitution conferred DTG resistance
but that the addition of a secondary H51Y mutation caused an additional
drop in viral fitness below that conferred by R263K alone ( 17 ). This
is in contrast to the usual situation whereby secondary resistance
mutations commonly play a compensatory role in regard to viral fitness
while also increasing levels of drug resistance. The R263K mutation has
also been identified in at least two ARV-experienced patients who were
treated with a DTG-containing regimen ( 18 ). Our results also showed
that the G118R substitution can confer resistance against DTG in subtype
B integrase ( 19 ). The G118R substitution alone and in conjunction with
the E138K substitution was previously identified in subtype C but not in
subtype B integrase in drug selections in culture with an
investigational INSTI, MK-2048 ( 20 ). Similarly to DTG, integrase
complex-drug binding studies showed that MK-2048 remained bound to the
preintegration complex for far longer times than either RAL or EVG,
helping to explain its superior profile in regard to the development of
resistance in culture ( 21 ). Although the clinical development of
MK-2048 has not continued beyond phase IIb clinical trials for reasons
of poor pharmacokinetics, the selection of G118R by both DTG and MK-2048
as well as the increased susceptibility of the R263K-containing
integrase protein to MK-2048 ( 16 ) point to intersections and
similarities between the resistance profiles of these two compounds.

The purpose of this study was to gain a mechanistic understanding,
through cell culture and biochemical and structural analyses, of the
differential selection of G118R and its associated substitutions H51Y
and E138K in HIV subtypes B and C as well as in CRF02_AG and to evaluate
the impact of these substitutions on integrase activity.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Cells and antiviral compounds.

Escherichia coli strain XL10-Gold {Tet ^r^ Δ( *mcrA* ) *183* Δ(
*mcrCB-hsdSMR-mrr* ) *173 endA1 supE44 thi-1 recA1 gyrA96 relA1 lac* Hte
\[F′ *proAB lacI* ^q^ *Z* ΔM15 Tn *10* (Tet ^r^ ) Amy Cam ^r^ \]
(Stratagene)} ultracompetent cells were used for plasmid production. The
integrase inhibitor drugs RAL and MK-2048 were kindly provided by Merck
Inc., while EVG and DTG were kindly provided by Gilead Sciences and
GlaxoSmithKline, respectively. Prior to use, compounds were solubilized
in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and stored at −20°C. All reagents used were
enzyme grade and of high purity.

### Plasmids and site-directed mutagenesis.

The generation of a pET15b expression plasmid containing soluble HIV
subtype B and C integrases was reported previously ( 16 , 22 ). In order
to construct a pET-15b expression plasmid containing the soluble HIV
circulating recombinant form (CRF02_AG), the CRF02_AG integrase coding
sequence was amplified from p97AG proviral plasmid DNA (GenBank
accession number AB052867.1) by PCR using the following primers:
p97-INT-FWD (5′-GCCAGGATCCTTTTTAGATGGCATAGATAAAGCCCAAGAAG-3′) and
p97-INT-RVS (5′-GTTATCTAGATTAATCCTCATCCTGTCTATCTGCCACACAATC-3′).
Amplification products were purified by using the QIAquick PCR
purification kit (Qiagen, Toronto, ON, Canada), digested by using the
BamHI and XbaI restriction enzymes (NEB, Whitby, ON, Canada), and
ligated inside plasmid pET15b by using T4 DNA ligase (NEB). The
resulting plasmid, pET15b-INAG, was verified by sequencing.

PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis performed on this plasmid yielded
plasmid DNA coding for the G118R mutation, in isolation or together with
either of two additional mutations, H51Y and E138K. The following
primers were used for mutagenesis: G118R ~AG~ \_sense
(CCAGTGAAAGTGATACACACAGACAATCGCAGAAATTTCACC), G118R ~AG~ \_antisense
(GGTGAAATTTCTGCGATTGTCTGTGTGTATCACTTTCACTGG), H51Y ~AG~ \_sense
(GCTAAAAGGGGAAGCCATATATGGACAAGTAGACTGT), H51Y ~AG~ \_antisense
(ACAGTCTACTTGTCCATATATGGCTTCCCCTTTTAGC), E138K ~AG~ \_sense
(TTGGTGGACAAATGTTACACAAAAATTTGGAATTCCCTACAATCC), E138K ~AG~ \_antisense
(GGATTGTAGGGAATTCCAAATTTTTGTGTAACATTTGTCCACCAA), G118R ~C~ \_sense
(GGCCAGTCAAAGTAATACATACAGACAATCGTAGTAATTTCACCAG), G118R ~C~ \_antisense
(CTGGTGAAATTACTACGATTGTCTGTATGTATTACTTTGACTGGCC), H51Y ~C~ \_sense
(CAAAAGGGGAAGCCATGTATGGACAAGTAGACTGT), H51Y ~C~ \_antisense
(ACAGTCTACTTGTCCATACATGGCTTCCCCTTTTG), E138K ~C~ \_sense
(GGGCAGGTATCCAACAGAAATTTGGGATTCCCTAC), and E138K ~C~ \_antisense
(GTAGGGAATCCCAAATTTCTGTTGGATACCTGCCC). Successful mutagenesis was
confirmed by sequencing (Genome Quebec).

### Protein expression, purification, and quantification.

Plasmids bearing either a wild-type (WT) or an appropriately mutated IN
coding sequence were transformed into BL21(DE3) Gold \[F ^−^ *ompT hsdS*
~B~ (r ~B~ ^−^ m ~B~ ^−^ ) *dcm* Tet ^r^ *gal* λ(DE3) *endA* Hte
(Stratagene)\] cells for protein expression. Luria-Bertani (LB) broth
(Multicell), prepared in MilliQ water and supplemented with 100 μg/ml
ampicillin, was used for all bacterial growth. Expression and
purification of integrase recombinant proteins were performed as
previously described for hexahistidine-tagged integrase ( 16 ).
Fractions containing purified integrase, as judged by SDS-PAGE, were
dialyzed into storage buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM
dithiothreitol \[DTT\], 10% glycerol \[pH 7.5\]). Protein concentrations
were measured by using a calculated molar extinction coefficient of
50,420 M ^−1^ cm ^−1^ ; of note, the molar extinction coefficients of
all integrase proteins were the same and in congruence with that
calculated for subtype B integrase ( 16 ). Protein aliquots were kept
for several months at −80°C without a significant loss of enzymatic
activity.

### DNA substrates for *in vitro* assays.

All oligonucleotide substrates were purchased from Integrated DNA
Technologies (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA). The following oligonucleotides
were used for strand transfer assays: preprocessed donor LTR DNA sense
primer A, tagged at the 5′ end by a 12-carbon linker to a reactive amino
group (AmMC12) (5′-AmMC12-ACCCTTTTAGTCAGTGTGGAAAATCTCTAGCA-3′), and
antisense primer B (5′-ACTGCTAGAGATTTTCCACACTGACTAAAAG-3′) and
biotinylated (Bio) target DNA sense primer C
(5′-TGACCAAGGGCTAATTCACT-3′Bio) and antisense primer D
(5′-AGTGAATTAGCCCTTGGTCA-3′Bio). For 3′ processing assays, primer B was
used together with LTR 3′ sense oligonucleotide E, which is 5′ modified
with an AmMC12 tag and modified at the 3′ end with a biotin tag attached
via a triethylene glycol spacer (BioTEG)
(5′-AmMC12-ACCCTTTTAGTCAGTGTGGAAAATCTCTAGCAGT-BioTEG-3′).

The key features of these oligonucleotides were previously described (
16 , 23 ). Functional DNA duplexes were made by combining equimolar
quantities of sense and antisense primers to appropriate concentrations
in low-chelate Tris-EDTA (TE) buffer (10 mM Tris, 0.1 mM EDTA \[pH
7.8\]). The combined primers were heated for 10 min at 95°C and annealed
by slow cooling to room temperature over a period of 4 h. Duplexes were
stored at −20°C for several months without a loss of integrity.

### Preparation of preprocessed LTR-coated plates for strand transfer activity.

Eighty microliters of preprocessed viral LTR-mimic (donor DNA) duplex
A/B diluted to 300 nM (except as dictated by experimental design) in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) (Bioshop) was covalently linked
to Costar DNA-Bind 96-well plates (catalog number 2499; Corning) by
overnight incubation at 4°C. The plates were blocked with 0.5% bovine
serum albumin (BSA) in blocking buffer (20 mM Tris \[pH 7.8\], 150 mM
NaCl) and stored in blocking buffer for several weeks without a
detectable loss of integrity. Before use, the plates were washed twice
with PBS (pH 7.4) and then assay buffer {50 mM morpholinepropanesulfonic
acid (MOPS) (pH 6.8), 50 μg/ml BSA, 50 mM NaCl, 0.15%
3-\[(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammonio\]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 30
mM MnCl ~2~ /MgCl ~2~ }, except as dictated by experimental design.

### Protein calibration for strand transfer activity.

In order to better elucidate the impact of resistance substitutions, the
strand transfer and 3′ processing steps of the HIV integration reactions
were decoupled, as previously described ( 16 , 19 ). The optimum
concentration of protein for use in strand transfer experiments was
determined by titration, as previously described ( 16 , 19 ). Briefly,
purified integrase proteins, appropriately diluted in reaction buffer
(50 mM MOPS \[pH 6.8\], 50 mg/ml BSA, 50 mM NaCl, 30 mM MnCl ~2~ ,
0.015% CHAPS, 5 mM DTT), were added to preprocessed LTR-bound plates as
described above. This step was followed by a 30-min incubation at room
temperature to allow for the assembly of integrase onto the preprocessed
LTR duplexes. Various concentrations of biotinylated target DNA duplex
C/D (0 to 240 nM) were added, followed by a 1-h incubation at 37°C for
the strand transfer reaction to occur. The plates were then rinsed three
times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris \[pH 7.5\], 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween
20, 0.2 mg/ml BSA) and incubated with 150 μl of Eu-labeled streptavidin
(PerkinElmer) diluted to 0.025 μg/ml in wash buffer in the presence of
50 μM diethylenetriamine pentaacetate (DTPA) (Sigma). After additional
rinses with wash buffer, 100 μl of Wallac enhancement solution
(PerkinElmer) was added. The amount of target DNA covalently linked to
the LTR was then measured by quantifying the amount of bound Eu-labeled
streptavidin. The low pH of the Wallac solution caused the ionization of
Eu to Eu ^3+^ . Excitation of Eu ^3+^ ions by incident wavelength at 355
nm resulted in time-resolved emission of fluorescence (TRF), which was
measured at 612 nm on a FLUOStar Optima multilabel plate reader (BMG
Labtech).

Protein concentrations that yielded the highest activity, as measured by
relative fluorescence units (RFU), were chosen for subsequent
experiments.

### Strand transfer activity assay.

Michaelis-Menten enzyme analysis has previously been used to determine
enzyme parameters of HIV integrase ( 24 ). While 3′ processing has been
conclusively shown to follow non-Michaelis-Menten kinetics ( 25 , 26 ),
there has been no similar study of HIV integrase strand transfer. In
order to obtain relative activity parameters for wild-type and variant
integrase proteins, strand transfer reactions were carried out based on
the same design as that for the protein calibration assay described
above. The major deviation was that an effective LTR concentration of
160 nM and an effective integrase concentration of 300 nM were used for
these assays, while the target DNA concentration varied from 0 to 128
nM. All other experimental procedures were performed as described above.
The means of data from at least three independent experiments, each
performed in triplicate for the wild-type integrase and each variant
integrase protein, were calculated. The values of enzyme activity in RFU
( *A* ) and target DNA concentration ( *S* ) were fit by nonlinear
regression using GraphPad Prism V5 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA,
USA) to the following the Michaelis-Menten derivative equations: *A* =
*A* ~max~ ′ · \[ *S* \]/(\[ *S* \] + *K ~m~* ′) and *K ~m~* ′ = *A*
~max~ · \[ *S* \]/ *A* − \[ *S* \].

In this case, the pseudo-Michaelis constant ( *K ~m~* ′) reflects the
apparent affinity of the enzyme for the target DNA substrate (\[ *S*
\]), and the maximum activity ( *A* ~max~ ′) reflects the maximum
activity obtainable with same concentration of the protein in a similar
assay, regardless of the substrate concentration. To determine overall
enzyme efficiency, we calculated the ratio of *A* ~max~ ′ to *K ~m~* ′,
as previously described ( 19 ), which is presented as a percentage of
wild-type values.

### 3′ processing activity assay.

The 3′ processing activity of the purified recombinant integrase
proteins was determined as previously described ( 23 ). Briefly,
3′-biotinylated LTR duplex G/B was covalently linked at various
concentrations (effective concentration, 0 to 160 nM) to Costar DNA-Bind
plates under conditions similar to those described above for strand
transfer assays. To initiate 3′ processing, purified integrase protein
(300 nM) diluted in reaction buffer was added, and the plates were
incubated at 37°C. Negative protein control wells had only reaction
buffer added. After 2 h of incubation, the reaction was within the
linear phase ( 23 ), and the plates were quickly washed three times with
wash buffer to remove all traces of protein and cleaved 3′-GT
dinucleotide. All subsequent steps of the assay were the same as those
described above for the strand transfer assay, with the exception of
data analysis. For each plate and concentration of LTR, four negative
protein controls contained unprocessed LTR, and the average signal from
these controls represented the maximum possible signal (3′-OH ~max~ ).
Thus, the RFU representing actual 3′ processing activity (3′-OH ~actual~
) was determined by the following calculation: (3′-OH ~actual~ ) =
(3′-OH ~max~ ) − (3′-OH ~obs~ ).

The calculated 3′ processing readings ( *n* ≥ 3) were then processed by
using GraphPad Prism to yield 3′ processing enzyme parameters, as
previously described ( 23 ). The data within the linear phase of the 3′
processing reaction were used to calculate kinetic parameters by fitting
the data to the Michaelis-Menten equation ( 24 ). As such, relative
enzyme efficiency calculations of 3′ processing activity were calculated
as described above for strand transfer.

### Confirmation of the impact of G118R and E138K on subtype C integrase inhibition by MK-2048.

Since the selection of the G118R substitution in cell culture was
initially driven by MK-2048 drug pressure ( 20 ) in a subtype C HIV-1
backbone, we performed preliminary confirmation that the G118R and the
associated E138K substitutions caused resistance to MK-2048. The
dose-dependent susceptibility of the subtype C WT, G118R, E138K, and
G118R/E138K proteins to MK-2048 was tested. Briefly, strand transfer
assays were performed as described above, with slight modifications.
Following incubation of subtype C WT, G118R, E138K, and G118R/E138K
proteins with LTR DNA, dose-ranging amounts of MK-2048 (20 pM to 20 μM)
dissolved in compound dilution buffer were added to each well (25 μl
each). After an incubation period of 10 min at room temperature, 25 μl
of target DNA (6 nM) was added to each well, and the strand transfer
reaction was allowed to proceed as described above. All subsequent steps
were performed as described above for the strand transfer assay. Data
obtained were normalized and fit to the following log
(inhibitor)-versus-normalized response equation with GraphPad Prism to
yield estimates of the 50% inhibitory concentration (IC ~50~ ) of the
drug for the different proteins: *A* = 100/{1 + 10
^(\[\ *I*\ \]−logIC50)^ }.

In the above-described equation, *A* represents residual strand transfer
activity at a given drug concentration, \[ *I* \]. Each experiment was
done in triplicate. The fold change (FC) in the susceptibility of each
variant to MK-2048 was calculated by dividing the IC ~50~ for that
variant by that of the WT subtype C integrase protein tested at the same
time. Mean FC susceptibility data from at least three independent
experiments were graphed by using GraphPad Prism.

### Competitive inhibition of strand transfer by DTG, RAL, and EVG.

The susceptibilities of our purified integrase proteins to INSTIs were
tested in competitive inhibition assays using DTG, RAL, and EVG. Drug
stock solutions were prepared as a 6× working solution (6,000 nM) and
subsequently serially diluted 4-fold into compound dilution buffer
(assay buffer without cations and containing 10% DMSO). The assay
mixture concentrations varied from 0.2 to 1,000 nM; inhibition assays
were performed in the presence of various target DNA concentrations (0
to 128 nM). Briefly, preprocessed LTR-coated plates (effective LTR
concentration of 160 nM) were prepared as described above. Purified
integrase proteins (effective concentration of 300 nM), in assay buffer
supplemented with 5 mM DTT, were added to each well, followed by a
30-min incubation at room temperature to allow for the assembly of
integrase onto the preprocessed LTR duplexes. Twenty-five microliters of
the appropriately diluted compound was added to each well, followed
immediately by the addition of 25 μl of the appropriately diluted
biotinylated target DNA duplex. The plates were then incubated for 1 h
at 37°C, followed by the post-strand transfer steps described above. The
data from at least three independent competition assays for each protein
were fit to the competitive inhibition algorithm using GraphPad Prism as
follows: *K ~m~* ~obs~ = *K ~m~* ′ · (1 + \[ *I* \]/ *K ~i~* ) and *A* =
*A* ~max~ ′ · \[ *S* \]/( *K ~m~* ~obs~ + \[ *S* \]).

In the above-described equation, *K ~m~* ~obs~ represents the Michaelis
constant obtained in the presence of the inhibitor, \[ *I* \] represents
the inhibitor concentration, and *K ~i~* is the inhibition constant of
the inhibitor for that particular protein. All other abbreviations are
defined above. During analysis, the *K ~m~* ′ for each protein was
constrained to value previously determined in the strand transfer
activity assays described above, while *V* ~max~ ′ was left
unconstrained.

*K ~i~* values calculated by this algorithm were transformed to FC
values by division of the *K ~i~* values for variant proteins by the *K
~i~* value for the appropriate wild-type integrase enzyme. FC
calculations from multiple inhibition assays were compiled and analyzed
by using GraphPad Prism.

### Monogram Biosciences PhenoSense replication capacity and phenotyping assays.

The HIV replication capacity and susceptibilities to DTG, RAL, and EVG
were measured as previously described ( 27 . Briefly, murine leukemia
virus envelope-pseudotyped HIVs bearing WT, H51Y, G118R, E138K, or
G118R/E138K integrases and a luciferase reporter gene were used to
inoculate human embryonic kidney HEK-293 cells. The resultant luciferase
activity was used to calculate changes in HIV replication capacity
relative to that of a wild-type reference strain. Drug susceptibility
was expressed as a fold change in the IC ~50~ relative to that of the
wild type.

### Data processing.

Data for all cell-free experiments presented here, except where
otherwise indicated, were the results of at least 3 independent sets of
experiments. When relevant, the statistical significance of differences
between data sets for two or more integrase proteins was determined by
using a one-sample two-tailed *t* test with GraphPad Prism. Probability
values of ≤0.05 ( *P* ≤ 0.05) were indicative of statistically
significant differences between the different proteins tested.

### Homology modeling and active-site analysis.

Homology models of integrase proteins were generated by using the
ProtMod server ( http://ffas.burnham.org/ ), based on lead subtype B
model templates that were initially generated by using the I-TASSER
protein modeling server ( 28 ). The prototype foamy virus (PFV)
structure reported under PDB accession number 4E7K ( 29 ) was utilized
as a lead template to generate a subtype B WT monomeric model for the
formation of the target capture complex (TCC). The PFV integrase
structure reported under PDB accession number 3S3M was used as a lead
template to create the I-TASSER model for DTG-bound HIV integrase. The
ProtMod server was used to minimize stochastic errors between the models
and to remove any sampling errors introduced by the multitemplate
modeling method ( 30 ) of I-TASSER. Briefly, single-template (subtype B
WT) and single-query (each integrase sequence, including that of subtype
B WT integrase) alignments were performed by using the alignment program
SCWRL ( 31 ). The program Modeler ( 27 ) was then used to create
monomeric homology models of each integrase based on the SCWRL sequence
alignment and the subtype B WT I-TASSER structure. Model quality was
assessed based on the root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the global
homology structure from the PFV lead template by using the RCSB PDB
Protein Comparison Tool ( 32 ). All structures were also verified as
having \>89% of residues in allowed and favorable orientations by
Ramachandran plot analysis ( 33 , 34 ). Superimposition of the HIV-1
homology models with the reported cocrystal structure of PFV with DTG
(PDB accession number 3S3M) provided insights into the mechanism of
resistance caused by the G118R substitution in regard to this and other
INSTIs. DNA interaction hints were obtained by overlaying the HIV-1
homology models with the PFV crystal structure reported under PDB
accession number 4E7K, representing the TCC ( 29 ). The molecular
visualization program PyMOL (PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version
1.3; Schrödinger, LLC \[ http://PyMOL.org/ \]) was used for structural
visualization and image processing.

::: section

## RESULTS

### Generation of recombinant HIV subtype C and CRF02_AG integrase enzymes.

Two resistance selection studies performed in our laboratory with the
investigative drugs MK-2048 and S/GSK139572 (DTG) yielded the G118R
mutation in subtype C ( 20 ) and CRF02_AG ( 16 ) integrases,
respectively. Key amino acid changes observed in these selection studies
are presented in Table 1 . Recombinant enzymes, either of the wild-type
sequence or site mutated to contain H51Y, G118R, or E138K, H51Y/G118R,
and G118R/E138K, were expressed and purified as previously described (
16 , 17 , 19 ). As in previous studies, protein calibration confirmed
that maximum protein activity occurred with 300 nM protein for all
subtypes (not shown). Therefore, subsequent experiments utilized 300 nM
integrase protein. When relevant, we compared our results with those
obtained by using the subtype B protein.

TABLE 1

^a^

Substitutions tested in this work are shown in boldface type.

### Effect of G118R on integrase strand transfer efficiency alone or in combination with H51Y or E138K.

Given that G118R and mutations associated with it arose during serial
passage with several INSTIs, we expected these mutations to impact the
strand transfer reaction. In CRF02_AG integrase, the presence of any of
the H51Y, G118R, and E138K substitutions significantly reduced the
enzyme parameters of the strand transfer reaction ( Fig. 1A ) and led to
reductions in enzyme efficiency of \>50% ( Fig. 1C ). H51Y caused a
significant loss of enzyme efficiency in CRF02_AG and subtype B but not
in subtype C integrase ( Fig. 1B and C ). The E138K single mutation was
also not associated with a drop in enzyme efficiency in subtype B and C
integrase proteins but caused a \>55% loss of activity when present in
CRF02_AG integrase. Of note, G118R caused significant diminutions in
activity for all subtypes treated, i.e., subtype C (43% of WT activity),
CRF02_AG, (27%), and subtype B (12%) ( Fig. 1C ). The addition of H51Y
and E138K to G118R partially restored the strand transfer efficiency of
subtype B integrase but less so with the subtype C or CRF02_AG integrase
enzyme ( Fig. 1C ).

FIG 1

### Impact of the G118R, H51Y, and E138K substitutions on 3′ processing ability.

To fully assess the impact of the G118R, H51Y, and E138K substitutions
on integration, it is essential that the 3′ processing ability of the
various integrase proteins be evaluated. Accordingly, cell-free 3′
processing experiments were performed by using dose-ranging levels of
the viral LTR mimic, as previously described ( Fig. 2 ) ( 19 ). The LTR
DNA binding ability of the recombinant proteins, as indirectly inferred
from *K ~m~* ′ values, was not significantly different from that of the
WT, except for H51Y for both non-B subtypes and E138K for subtype C (
Fig. 2A and B ). H51Y resulted in markedly tighter binding to the LTR
for both the CRF02_AG and subtype C integrase proteins, while the
opposite result was obtained for subtype C integrase containing the
E138K substitution ( Fig. 2A and B ). G118R alone or in combination with
either H51Y or E138K did not cause a significant change in LTR binding
for either subtype. However, the doubly substituted H51Y/G118R CRF02_AG
protein showed lower LTR DNA binding than that of the WT.

FIG 2

The impacts of these mutations on overall 3′ processing activity were
markedly different among the subtypes tested ( Fig. 2C to E ). All
CRF02_AG variant proteins exhibited significantly higher 3′ processing
activity ( Fig. 2C ) and, thus, higher enzyme efficiency ( Fig. 2E )
than did the WT protein. In the subtype C protein, the presence of the
E138K substitution resulted in a 38% reduction in the efficiency of 3′
processing, while the H51Y and E138K substitutions were without effect.
A diminished 3′ processing ability was observed for the G118R integrase
protein of subtype B but not of subtype C or CRF02_AG.

### Effect of G118R and E138K on subtype C integrase protein resistance to MK-2048.

The G118R substitution was selected in cell culture by MK-2048 in a
subtype C virus ( 20 ). Despite being selected by subtype C isolate
4742, the addition of E138K (within 4 weeks) was necessary to engender
significant resistance of the virus to MK-2048, with a fold change (FC)
of the 50% effective concentration (EC ~50~ ) of ∼139 ( Fig. 3A ), and
lower levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼4.4) and EVG (FC, ∼4.1).
We also studied the susceptibility of subtype C WT integrase or
integrase containing the G118R, E138K, or G118R/E138K substitution to
MK-2048 ( Fig. 3 and Table 2 ). As previously reported for subtype B in
cell culture ( 20 ), the G118R substitution resulted in minimal
resistance to MK-2048 (FC, ∼1.5) ( Fig. 3A and B ), and this level of
resistance was significantly increased by the presence of the E138K
mutation (FC, ∼11). Of note, the FC in resistance to MK-2048 reported
for the clonal G118R/E138K subtype C virus is ∼100-fold higher than the
one previously reported for a subtype B virus ( 20 ). This result may
partially account for the emergence of G118R and the additional
selection of E138K in subtype C viruses ( 20 ).

FIG 3

TABLE 2

^a^

ND, not determined.

^b^

Phenotyping studies performed on infectious viruses selected during
MK-2048 selections in cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMCs).

### Effect of G118R on susceptibility to DTG, RAL, and EVG.

We next tested the susceptibilities of subtype C and CRF02_AG integrase
proteins, containing G118R alone or in combination with H51Y or E138K,
as well as those containing H51Y or E138K alone, to DTG, RAL, and EVG (
Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes
resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A
and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and
EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only
low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility
to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 );
no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to
resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and
E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R
combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in
slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with
G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y
was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R
variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both
RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable
to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, \<2). H51Y/G118R, in
the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and
EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant
enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability;
compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of
subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility,
increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG,
respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited
similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2
) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The
E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to
DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance
to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level
cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).

FIG 4

Clonal WT, H51Y, G118R, E138K, or G118R/E138K viruses were phenotyped by
Monogram Biosciences in the subtype B and CRF02_AG backgrounds ( Tables
2 and 3 ). Difficulties in generating clonal variants of subtype C
precluded its similar analysis. The phenotyping data imply that G118R
alone conferred significant yet low-level resistance to DTG in both
subtype B and CRF02_AG but with a significant loss of viral replication
capacity ( Table 2 ). G118R also caused significant cross-resistance to
EVG and RAL, particularly to RAL in CRF02_A/G ( 35 ). Where possible,
when the calculated resistance levels and viral replication in cell
culture were compared to the calculated resistance and integration
activity from biochemical assays ( Table 3 ), there was good agreement
between the two methods for most variants.

TABLE 3

^a^

Cell culture experiments tend to yield higher FC values than do
cell-free assays (\>3) ( 16 ). Susceptibility rankings of FC for
cell-free experiments are as follows: −, 0 to \<1.5; +, 1.5 to \<2.5;
++, 2.5 to \<4.0; +++, ≥4.0. In cell culture experiments, susceptibility
rankings are as follows: −, 0 to \<2.0; +, 2.0 to \<5.0; ++, 5.0 to
\<10.0; +++, ≥10.0.

^b^

In the cell, 3′ processing is the rate-limiting step for integration ( 7
); therefore, we either calculated the overall integration efficiency by
multiplication of the enzyme efficiency (EE) values for 3′ processing
and strand transfer (if the enzyme efficiency for 3′ processing was
higher than the strand transfer efficiency) or retained the enzyme
efficiency for 3′ processing (if the efficiency of 3′ processing was
much lower than the strand transfer efficiency). ND, not determined; RC,
replication capacity.

### Amino acid sequences differ at key positions between the three subtypes.

We performed multiple-sequence alignments using ClustalW v1.8 software (
36 ) to try to explain the subtype-specific differences in these
experimental data. Integrase amino acid sequences from subtype B
(pNL4_3), subtype C (pINdieC), and CRF02_AG (p97) were aligned ( Fig. 5
). The three integrase amino acid sequences share \>93% sequence
identity and differed at only at a few positions, mostly through
conservative polymorphisms. Interestingly, several polymorphic positions
appear to be close to second-generation INSTI resistance-associated
positions. As an example, the amino acid at position 50 in
treatment-naive patients is mostly M in subtype B ( 37 ), with
polymorphisms in other subtypes. The M50I substitution appeared as a
secondary mutation to R263K during passage of subtype B HIV in the
presence of DTG ( 16 ) and increased the levels of resistance to DTG,
together with R263K, without affecting the viral fitness cost imposed by
R263K ( 37 ). Position 50 is also only one residue downstream of the DTG
resistance-associated substitution H51Y, which appears to be a secondary
substitution for both G118R and R263K that increased the levels of
resistance to both DTG and EVG while also increasing the fitness cost
imposed by R263K in subtype B HIV ( 17 ).

FIG 5

Another key polymorphic position at residue 91 is naturally A in both
subtypes B and C and is E in CRF02_AG. CRF02_AG integrase possesses an R
at position 119, while subtypes B and C have an S at this position, and
all three subtypes have different residues at positions 133 to 136. Of
note, positions 140, 143, 148, and 155 ( Fig. 5 , boxed in blue), which
are associated with primary drug resistance to RAL and EVG, all occur
within highly invariant motifs. Although the C terminus of integrase is
known to be highly polymorphic across retroviral genera, it is highly
conserved among the three subtypes studied here.

::: section

## DISCUSSION

The integrase inhibitor-associated substitution G118R has never been
selected in subtype B viruses by any drug, either in the clinic or in a
laboratory setting. In contrast, it has been selected in culture in
subtype C and CRF02_AG clonal viruses ( Table 1 ) ( 16 , 20 ) and in the
clinic in a CRF02_AG virus ( 35 ). We subsequently showed that the
presence of this mutation, when introduced into subtype B integrase,
caused resistance to DTG, EVG, and RAL ( 19 ) at both an integrative
cost ( 19 ) and a fitness cost to the virus ( 20 ). In this study, we
investigated the biochemical basis for the differential selection of
G118R and its associated H51Y and E138K amino acid substitutions in HIV
subtypes B and C as well as CRF02_AG. We evaluated the impact of G118R
alone or in concert with either H51Y or E138K on the ability of
recombinant integrase proteins from subtypes B, C, and CRF02_AG to
perform strand transfer and 3′ processing activities, and the individual
impacts of H51Y and E138K were determined. We also evaluated the
phenotypes of HIV-1 clonal viruses bearing wild-type or variant
integrase sequences. After verifying that the sequential selection of
G118R and E138K caused resistance to MK-2048, we also tested the
susceptibilities of the various recombinant enzymes to the clinically
relevant INSTIs DTG, RAL, and EVG. Molecular modeling was used to
provide an understanding of interresidue and integrase-DNA interactions
that drive the differential impacts of G118R, H51Y, and E138K in
different HIV-1 subtypes.

Of all the recombinant proteins tested, the subtype B G118R integrase
had the greatest loss of enzyme efficiency relative to that of the WT
(∼90% for strand transfer and ∼50% for 3′ processing), perhaps
explaining why G118R is not selected in subtype B viruses ( 15 ). In
both the CRF02_AG and subtype C proteins, the G118R mutation alone
resulted in ∼70% and ∼60% losses of WT strand transfer efficiency,
respectively. In all subtypes tested, the G118R mutation involves a G→C
transversion that is less common than the G→A transition that is seen in
the case of many drug resistance mutations such as R263K ( 38 ). In
subtype B, the addition of H51Y or E138K, neither of which has a major
impact on strand transfer and 3′ processing, partially rescued
G118R-containing enzymes while not significantly increasing the
activities of G118R-containing subtype C or CRF02_AG enzymes ( Fig. 1B
and C and 2B and C ). Thus, the impact of H51Y and E138K may be related
to resistance, particularly since H51Y emerged together with G118R in
subtype C DTG selections.

The highly subtype-dependent protein activities revealed here by enzyme
activity assays show that minor polymorphic differences among subtypes
may play important roles in fitness and in pathways for resistance. A
key experiment ( Fig. 3 ) showed that G118R in subtype C caused minimal
if any resistance to MK-2048 (FCs of ∼2.0 and 0.87 for cell-free and
cell culture assays, respectively), but the addition of E138K
significantly augmented levels of such resistance (FCs of ∼11 and 139,
respectively). This was important since MK-2048 was the first compound
to select sequentially for G118R and E138K in a subtype C viral backbone
( 20 ). More relevant clinically, the G118R mutation caused a FC in
resistance to DTG of ∼1.8 to 3.5 for all three subtypes ( Fig. 4A ) and
resulted in various levels of cross-resistance to RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and
EVG ( Fig. 4C ). In CRF02_AG integrase, G118R caused high-level
resistance to RAL (FCs of ∼8 and 17 in cell-free and cell culture
assays, respectively), consistent with a clinical report of G118R in a
patient harboring CRF02_AG virus who failed a RAL-containing regimen (
35 ).

The impact of H51Y and E138K on resistance, whether alone or together
with G118R, varied depending on subtype ( Fig. 4 ). Based on integrase
homology modeling and structural overlays, the G118R substitution
inhibits strand transfer activity by sterically hindering the access of
target DNA to the strand transfer hot spot ( Fig. 6 , yellow dotted
circles) and by impeding hydrogen bond formation with D116. This effect
was not seen with G118R in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 6B ) or subtype C ( Fig. 6C
), nor is there interference with cation coordination or interactions
with D64, the most important catalytic residue ( 39 ). In contrast, 118R
in subtype B forms strong electrostatic interactions with D64, C65, as
well as D116 ( Fig. 6A ). Subtype B 118R also extends in a manner that
might force the repositioning of active-site Mg ^2+^ ions. In a subtype
B DTG-bound model, the G118R side chain was shown physically overlap the
DTG binding site ( 40 ). The presence of either H51Y or E138K caused the
partial (H51Y) or complete (E138K) repositioning of the G118R side chain
( Fig. 7J ). In the DTG-bound models, G118R formed salt bridge
interactions with D64 and hydrogen bonding with D116 in both CRF02_AG (
Fig. 7H ) and subtype C ( Fig. 7I ). In these cases, the active site
would be seriously affected, and the repositioning of at least one
active-site Mg ^2+^ ion would be necessary ( Fig. 7 H and I \[potential
Mg ^2+^ movement is indicated by the dotted red arrow\]). In both
scenarios, the long side chain of 118R is completely within the DTG
binding pocket ( Fig. 7K and L ). The addition of either H51Y or E138K
in a G118R background partially (E138K) or completely (H51Y)
repositioned the 118R side chain out of the DTG binding pocket in
CRF02_AG ( Fig. 7K ). In subtype C, the addition of either H51Y of E138K
was insufficient to significantly reposition the 118R side chain. This
result, coupled with the slightly better activity profile caused by
either substitution, may explain the slight increase in resistance
associated with these secondary mutations.

FIG 6

FIG 7

The variable impacts of H51Y and E138K on integrase activity and drug
resistance might be due to proximity with various polymorphic positions
( Fig. 5 ). Position 51 is clearly important for DTG resistance; H51Y
was a secondary resistance mutation to R263K, augmented resistance to
DTG ( 17 ), and was also selected together with G118R or alone by DTG (
16 ). The adjacent position M50 is polymorphic among subtypes, and M50I,
which is a secondary substitution to R263K in subtype B ( 16 ), was
shown to augment R263K-associated resistance to DTG and EVG ( 37 ).
Because DTG binds primarily to DNA and does not have as many protein
contacts as RAL, and because it is more flexible than EVG ( 40 ), DNA
binding may be impacted by a number of the DTG-selected substitutions:
H51Y (LTR DNA), G118R (target DNA), M50I (LTR DNA), and R263K and E138K
(both LTR and target DNA) ( 16 , 17 , 19 , 37 , 41 ). In the case of
G118R and associated substitutions, slight active-site perturbations
caused by 118R may be linked. Most DTG-associated mutations appear to
interact with the loop spanning L46 to T66, which spans the DNA binding
trough and interacts with both C-terminal and active-site residues.

The concomitant appearance of A49P, V234L, and S119R substitutions in a
previously DTG-susceptible N155H-containing subtype B virus was
associated with clinical resistance to DTG ( 42 ). These substitutions
propelled a significant shift in the highly conserved loop region
spanning L46 to T66, drastically altering the active site and resulting
in a severely compromised virus that was also highly resistant to DTG (
42 ). M50I is the sole polymorphic residue in this stretch, and its
impact on residue 49 as well as on residue 51 may vary between subtypes.
The presence of multiple subtype-specific polymorphisms in association
with E138K ( Fig. 5 ) may not affect overall protein structure ( Fig. 6
), but altered side-chain interactions ( Fig. 7 ) may be sufficient to
cause a differential impact on DNA binding as well as the
G118R-associated DTG resistance reported here. Modeling studies suggest
that E138K in a DTG-bound state communicates with G118G/R primarily
through the interaction of Q137 with the backbone amide of residue 118.
E138 also interacts indirectly with INSTI resistance position Q148 by
sequential hydrogen bonding with H114 ( 43 ). The charged nature of H114
implies that the presence of 138K may affect the H114 orientation and,
ultimately, the orientation of Q148, with variable consequences for
INSTI cross-resistance. The fact that E138K, in addition to having
electrostatic interactions with H114, also forms such interactions with
E136 in subtype B (residue 136 is T in CRF02_AG and Q in subtype C) (
Fig. 5 and 7 ) implies that the impact of E138K on the orientation of
Q148 may differ among subtypes and that the impact on drug
susceptibility might also differ among subtypes.

The classical G140, Y143, and Q148 substitutions associated with
resistance to RAL and EVG are in the active-site loop, and N155, also
associated with resistance to RAL and EVG, is located deep in the active
site. Any changes to these residues directly impact the ability of the
active site to interact with the drug versus the substrate and can
directly influence resistance and enzyme activity without the need for
significant interresidue interactions. In these cases, the subtype may
be irrelevant to the level of drug resistance that results. The EVG E92Q
mutation, like G118R, is on the periphery of the INSTI binding pocket,
and variable interactions involving HIV subtypes can affect the level of
resistance that is associated with this substitution ( 44 ).

DTG is able to evade these primary EVG and RAL substitutions because it
forms hydrophobic stacking interactions with the terminally processed
viral LTR CA dinucleotide ( 40 ) and coordinates optimally with
active-site Mg ^2+^ ions without the need to interact significantly with
the integrase protein ( 45 ). Thus, it is more difficult to develop
resistance to DTG. There is growing evidence that G118R and R263K are
two mutations that can engender resistance to DTG ( 16 -- 19 , 37 , 41 ,
46 ), and both substitutions have also been shown to engender INSTI
resistance in simian immunodeficiency virus ( 47 ). In this context,
minor polymorphisms that vary among subtypes may be able to play a major
role in the development of drug resistance.

In all three subtypes tested here, G118R results in highly deficient
integration activity, and the secondary substitutions E138K and H51Y are
likely primarily rescue substitutions, although their effectiveness
varies between different integrase sequences. This work highlights the
need to better characterize polymorphic integrase positions,
particularly in treatment-experienced patients undergoing DTG therapy
and especially in patients failing therapy without previously reported
resistance substitutions.

::: section

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by unrestricted research grants from the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Merck Frosst,
GlaxoSmithKline, and the Canadian Foundation for AIDS Research (CANFAR)
to M.A.W. P.K.Q. is a recipient of a doctoral scholarship from the CIHR
and the Canadian Association for HIV Research (CAHR). S.H. is a
recipient of a doctoral studentship from the Fonds de la Recherche du
Québec en Santé (FRQS).

We are grateful to Alexandria Crandall, Kaitlin Anstett, Vincent
Cutillas, and Jiaming Liang for experimental assistance and valuable
discussions.

::: section

## Fig 1

FIG 1 Comparative strand transfer activities of purified HIV-1 WT integrase and variant integrase proteins of CRF02_AG, subtype C, and subtype B origins. (A) Target DNA saturation (0 to 128 nM) plots showing the activity of CRF02_AG (AG) proteins in the presence of fixed protein and LTR concentrations (300 nM and 160 nM, respectively). (B) Target DNA saturation plots showing the activity of subtype C proteins in the presence of fixed protein and LTR concentrations (300 nM and 160 nM, respectively). (C) Comparison of strand transfer reaction efficiencies for CRF02_AG, subtype B, and subtype C integrase proteins. All data presented reflect at least three independent experiments, each performed in duplicate or triplicate.


## Fig 2

FIG 2 Comparative 3′ processing activities of purified HIV-1 WT and variant integrase proteins of CRF02_AG, subtype C, and subtype B origins. (A and B) Effect of amino acid substitution on functional binding ( K m ′) of the viral LTR mimic by CRF02_AG integrase (A) or subtype C integrase (B). (C and D) LTR DNA saturation plots showing the activity of CRF02_AG (C) or subtype C (D) proteins in the presence of a fixed protein concentration (300 nM). (E) Comparison of 3′ processing reaction efficiencies for subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG integrase proteins. All data presented reflect at least three independent experiments, each performed in duplicate or triplicate.


## Fig 3

FIG 3 Confirmation of the role of the G118R and E138K substitutions in conferring resistance to MK-2048 in subtype C integrase. (A) Susceptibility of MK-2048-selected subtype C variant viruses to MK-2048, RAL, and EVG. (B) Dose-dependent inhibition of the strand transfer reaction of subtype C WT and G118R-, E138K-, and G118R/E138K-containing integrase proteins (INC) by the INSTI MK-2048 (0.173 nM to 5,000 nM). (C) Calculation of the FCs in IC 50 values relative to WT values showing that the G118R/E138K double-variant protein has high-level in vitro resistance to MK-2048. The data presented here are the results from at least three independent experiments performed in triplicate.


## Fig 4

FIG 4 Subtype-specific susceptibility of WT and variant integrase proteins to clinically relevant INSTIs. (A) DTG; (B) RAL; (C) EVG. K i values were derived by performing strand transfer assays with variable drug (0.2 nM to 1,000 nM) and variable target DNA (0 nM to 128 nM) concentrations in the presence of fixed concentrations of LTR (160 nM) and integrase protein (300 nM). Data were fit by nonlinear regression analysis using GraphPad Prism and by a competitive inhibition equation, as detailed in Materials and Methods. FC values were calculated for each experiment by dividing the observed K i value of each variant for a particular INSTI by that observed for the WT with the same INSTI. For each subtype, FC calculations from at least three individual experiments, analyzed by using column statistics, are presented.


## Fig 5

FIG 5 Multiple-sequence alignment of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG integrase sequences from plasmids pNL4_3, pINdieC, and p97, respectively, performed by using ClustalW (v1.8). The catalytic-site residues D64, D116, and E152 are highlighted in yellow. Perfectly conserved residues are marked with asterisks, conservative substitutions are marked with : and highlighted in purple, and semiconservative substitutions are marked with • and highlighted in light blue. Nonconservative substitutions are highlighted in red. Positions E92, G140, Y143, Q148, and N155, implicated in primary resistance to RAL and EVG, are boxed in purple. Labeled residues have been adequately characterized as affecting DTG susceptibility in this study (white text with black highlighting) or in previous studies (blue boldface type) ( 16 , 17 , 37 , 42 ).


## Fig 6

FIG 6 Modeled HIV-1 WT and G118R target capture complexes showing the differential impact of G118R on the active sites of the three integrase subtypes. HIV-1 WT or G118R monomeric homology models for each of the three subtypes were created based on the structure of the freeze-trapped PFV target capture complex (PDB accession number 4E7K). These models were then used to build dimers, as described in Materials and Methods. Integrase-DNA interaction as well as cation binding in the TCC were mimicked by direct overlay of the LTR DNA, target DNA, and the Mn 2+ and Zn 2+ ligands from the PFV structure. The impact of the G118R substitution on the strand transfer reaction with the active site of subtype B (A), CRF02_AG (B), and subtype C (C) was analyzed by visual assessment of the differing side-chain and backbone interactions as well as residue-DNA clashes that occur with the G118R substitution, particularly within the putative strand transfer zone (yellow circles). Structural visualization and manipulation were performed by using PyMOL. Protein and DNA structures are shown as cartoons, with the residues under investigation being shown as sticks. The catalytic triad residues are labeled in blue and shown as line traces. Structures of active-site residues interacting with residues 118, 51, and 138 are shown as line traces. Possible hydrophilic interactions between atoms separated by <3.5 Å are shown by black dashed lines. Colors of lines and sticks are based on main-chain color as well as standard atomic coloration. For clarity and where necessary, the colors of residue labels are the same as those in the cartoons for that particular model.


## Fig 7

FIG 7 Active-site modeling of DTG-bound integrase. For each subtype, HIV-1 WT, G118R, H51Y/G118R, or G118R/E138K monomeric models were created based on the structure of the DTG-bound PFV structure (PDB accession number 3S3M). These models were then used to build dimers as described in Materials and Methods. Integrase-DNA interaction, cation binding, and DTG-integrase interactions were mimicked by direct overlay of the LTR DNA, the Mn 2+ and Zn 2+ ligands, and DTG from the PFV structure reported under PDB accession number 3S3M. (A) Overlay of WT models for subtype B (green), subtype C (pink), and CRF02_AG (turquoise) showing key backbone interactions of G118. (B) Closeup view of the subtype B WT model showing interresidue and DNA-integrase interactions of H51. (C) Closeup view of the CRF02_AG WT model showing interresidue and DNA-integrase interactions of H51. (D) Closeup view of the subtype C WT model showing interresidue and DNA-integrase interactions of H51. (E) Closeup view of the subtype B WT model showing interresidue and DNA-integrase interactions of E138. (F) Closeup view of the CRF02_AG WT model showing interresidue and DNA-integrase interactions of E138. (G) Closeup view of the subtype C WT model showing interresidue and DNA-integrase interactions of E138. (H) Overlay of WT (turquoise) and G118R (yellow) active sites showing the impact of the G118R substitution on the CRF02_AG active site. Changes in the D64 side-chain orientation caused by 118R are indicated by an open blue arrow, and other key side-chain orientation changes are indicated by a solid blue arrow; the possible repositioning of at least one Mg 2+ cation is indicated by a dotted red arrow. (I) Overlay of WT (pink) and G118R (purple) active sites showing the impact of the G118R substitution on the subtype C active site. Changes in the D64 side-chain orientation caused by 118R are indicated by an open blue arrow, and other key side-chain orientation changes are indicated by a solid blue arrow; the possible repositioning of at least one Mg 2+ cation is indicated a the dotted red arrow. (J) Overlay of subtype B models of WT (green), G118R (tan), H51Y/G118R (red), and G118R/E138K (orange) integrase proteins showing the positioning of the three residues H51Y, G118R, and E138K relative to DTG. (K) Overlay of CRF02_AG models of the WT (turquoise), G118R (yellow), H51Y/G118R (olive green), and G118R/E138K (tan) integrase proteins showing the positioning of the three residues H51Y, G118R, and E138K relative to DTG. (L) Overlay of subtype C models of WT (pink), G118R (purple), H51Y/G118R (navy), and G118R/E138K (light blue) integrase proteins showing the positioning of the three residues H51Y, G118R, and E138K relative to DTG. Structural visualization and manipulation were performed by using PyMOL. Protein and DNA structures are shown as cartoons, with the residues under investigation being shown as sticks. The catalytic triad residues are labeled in blue and shown as line traces. Structures of active-site residues interacting with residues 118, 51, and 138 are shown as line traces. Possible hydrophilic interactions between atoms separated by <3.5 Å are shown as black dashed lines. Colors of lines and sticks are based on main-chain color as well as standard atomic coloration. For clarity and where necessary, the colors of residue labels are the same color as those in the cartoon for that particular model.


**Fig. 1 not found**

**Fig. 2 not found**

**Fig. 3 not found**

## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 4

Fig. 4 and Table 2 ). The G118R substitution in all three subtypes resulted in statistically similar levels of resistance to DTG ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ) and significant cross-resistance with RAL ( Fig. 4B ) and EVG ( Fig. 4C ). However, G118R in subtypes B and C resulted in only low-level resistance to RAL, whereas an 8-fold change in susceptibility to RAL was noted for CRF02_AG, consistent with clinical results ( 35 ); no statistical differences between subtypes were observed in regard to resistance to EVG. The impacts of the two secondary mutations H51Y and E138K on G118R-bearing protein differed between subtypes. The H51Y/G118R combination in subtype C, but not in CRF02_AG or subtype B, resulted in slightly elevated levels of resistance to DTG compared to that with G118R alone ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). Consistent with this, G118R/H51Y was selected by DTG in subtype C ( Table 1 ). Although the H51Y/G118R variant integrase enzyme showed low levels of cross-resistance to both RAL and EVG in subtype B (FC, ∼3), susceptibility levels were comparable to those of the WT for the subtype C protein (FC, <2). H51Y/G118R, in the CRF02_AG protein, displayed greater susceptibility to both RAL and EVG than the WT (FC, ∼0.6) ( Fig. 4B and C and Table 2 ). Variant enzymes bearing E138K showed the greatest subtype-dependent variability; compared to the WT, the G118R/E138K variant integrase proteins of subtype B, subtype C, and CRF02_AG showed decreased susceptibility, increased susceptibility, and similar susceptibility to DTG, respectively ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ). However, all 3 subtypes exhibited similar levels of cross-resistance to RAL (FC, ∼2) ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ) and WT levels of susceptibility to EVG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ). The E138K variant in the three subtypes exhibited low-level resistance to DTG (FC, ∼1.5 to 2) ( Fig. 4A and Table 2 ), low-level cross-resistance to RAL in subtype B ( Fig. 4B and Table 2 ), and high-level cross-resistance to EVG in CRF02_AG ( Fig. 4C and Table 2 ).


## Fig. 5

Fig. 5 , boxed in blue), which are associated with primary drug resistance to RAL and EVG, all occur within highly invariant motifs. Although the C terminus of integrase is known to be highly polymorphic across retroviral genera, it is highly conserved among the three subtypes studied here.


**Fig. 6 not found**

**Fig. 7 not found**



## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Table 2

**Table 2 not found**

## Table 3

**Table 3 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th>    Subtype   </th><th>    Baseline polymorphisms   </th><th>    Wk   </th><th>    Acquired mutation(s)   </th><th>    Wk   </th><th>    Acquired mutation(s)   </th><th>    Reference   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   MK-2048 selections  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   B  </td><td>   M154I, V201I  </td><td>   34  </td><td>   None  </td><td></td><td></td><td>   5  </td></tr><tr><td>   C  </td><td>   V72I, Q95P, T125A  </td><td>   25  </td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   29  </td><td>   G118R, E138K  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   DTG selections  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   B  </td><td>   M154I, V201I  </td><td>   20  </td><td>   R263K  </td><td>   37  </td><td>   E138E/K   , R263K  </td><td>   3  </td></tr><tr><td>   AG  </td><td>   V72I, T125A, V201I  </td><td>   20  </td><td>   R263K  </td><td>   37  </td><td>   H51H/Y   , R263K  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   AG  </td><td>   V72I, T125A, V201I  </td><td>   20  </td><td>   E69E/K,   G118R  </td><td>   37  </td><td>   G118R  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   C  </td><td>   V72I, Q95P, T125A  </td><td>   20  </td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   37  </td><td>   H51Y   ,   G118R  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   C  </td><td>   V72I, T125A, V201I  </td><td>   20  </td><td>   S153S/T  </td><td>   37  </td><td>   H51Y   , G193G/E  </td><td></td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="3">    HIV-1 subtype   </th><th rowspan="3">    Integrase phenotype   </th><th colspan="2">    Mean enzyme efficiency (% of WT) ± SD   </th><th rowspan="3">    Viral replication capacity (% of WT)   </th><th colspan="6">    Mean INSTI susceptibility (fold change relative to WT) ± SD   </th></tr><tr><th rowspan="2">    3′ processing   </th><th rowspan="2">    Strand transfer   </th><th colspan="2">    DTG   </th><th colspan="2">    RAL   </th><th colspan="2">    EVG   </th></tr><tr><th>    Cell free   </th><th>    Cell culture   </th><th>    Cell free   </th><th>    Cell culture   </th><th>    Cell free   </th><th>    Cell culture   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   CRF02_AG  </td><td>   WT  </td><td>   100 ± 10.9  </td><td>   100 ± 16.4  </td><td>   100  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y  </td><td>   309 ± 45.1  </td><td>   38.0 ± 1.4  </td><td>   69  </td><td>   1.47 ± 0.13  </td><td>   1.4  </td><td>   2.68 ± 0.08  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   0.631 ± 0.009  </td><td>   2.1  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   182 ± 37.4  </td><td>   27.0 ± 4.4  </td><td>   8  </td><td>   3.17 ± 0.67  </td><td>   15.5  </td><td>   8.48 ± 2.05  </td><td>   17.2  </td><td>   2.58 ± 0.77  </td><td>   7.7  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   E138K  </td><td>   193 ± 20.4  </td><td>   44.8 ± 2.5  </td><td>   91  </td><td>   2.61 ± 0.18  </td><td>   0.8  </td><td>   1.14 ± 0.23  </td><td>   0.8  </td><td>   5.87 ± 1.18  </td><td>   1.0  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y/G118R  </td><td>   147 ± 4.1  </td><td>   25.9 ± 4.4  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.24 ± 0.26  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   0.595 ± 0.018  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   0.617 ± 0.048  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R/E138K  </td><td>   155 ± 21.4  </td><td>   41.9 ± 2.4  </td><td>   32  </td><td>   1.33 ± 0.35  </td><td>   12.7  </td><td>   3.33 ± 0.78  </td><td>   20.2  </td><td>   1.39 ± 0.28  </td><td>   5.2  </td></tr><tr><td>   B  </td><td>   WT  </td><td>   100 ± 1.5  </td><td>   100 ± 0.4  </td><td>   100  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   42.5 ± 1.2  </td><td>   89  </td><td>   3.75 ± 0.82  </td><td>   1.4  </td><td>   1.43 ± 0.53  </td><td>   1.2  </td><td>   3.53 ± 2.49  </td><td>   2.0  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   54.7 ± 3.8  </td><td>   11.8 ± 1.7  </td><td>   30  </td><td>   3.11 ± 0.58  </td><td>   8.2  </td><td>   3.68 ± 0.75  </td><td>   10.6  </td><td>   4.62 ± 2.35  </td><td>   5.5  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   E138K  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   105 ± 2.2  </td><td>   77  </td><td>   1.83 ± 0.13  </td><td>   0.8  </td><td>   3.84 ± 0.37  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.30 ± 0.03  </td><td>   0.8  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y/G118R  </td><td>   170 ± 5.5  </td><td>   48.4 ± 0.04  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   3.43 ± 0.97  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.78 ± 0.65  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   3.18 ± 0.45  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R/E138K  </td><td>   140 ± 6.6  </td><td>   33.4 ± 1.46  </td><td>   43  </td><td>   0.644 ± 0.047  </td><td>   8.0  </td><td>   2.18 ± 0.13  </td><td>   14.1  </td><td>   0.884 ± 0.029  </td><td>   4.8  </td></tr><tr><td>   C  </td><td>   WT  </td><td>   100 ± 12.5  </td><td>   100 ± 11.2  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.00  </td><td>   1.0   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y  </td><td>   116 ± 36.8  </td><td>   114 ± 12.6  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.51 ± 1.22  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   5.80 ± 2.28  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.77 ± 0.57  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   96.4 ± 19.9  </td><td>   42.6 ± 6.6  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.31 ± 0.60  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.93 ± 0.64  </td><td>   0.3   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.93 ± 0.58  </td><td>   0.78   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   E138K  </td><td>   61.4 ± 7.3  </td><td>   114 ± 12.6  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.47 ± 0.26  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.30 ± 0.31  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.07 ± 0.26  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y/G118R  </td><td>   103 ± 5.5  </td><td>   31.3 ± 3.0  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   3.78 ± 1.21  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.51 ± 0.26  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   1.61 ± 0.29  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R/E138K  </td><td>   93.1 ± 15.3  </td><td>   47.9 ± 1.6  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.93 ± 1.00  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   2.20 ± 1.01  </td><td>   4.4   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   0.876 ± 0.221  </td><td>   4.1   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr></table>

## Any table 2

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="3">    HIV-1 subtype   </th><th rowspan="3">    Integrase phenotype   </th><th colspan="6">    Extent of INSTI susceptibility (FC relative to WT)    <sup>     a    </sup></th><th colspan="2">    % integration activity    <sup>     b    </sup></th></tr><tr><th colspan="2">    DTG   </th><th colspan="2">    RAL   </th><th colspan="2">    EVG   </th><th rowspan="2">    EE   </th><th rowspan="2">    RC   </th></tr><tr><th>    Cell free   </th><th>    Cell culture   </th><th>    Cell free   </th><th>    Cell culture   </th><th>    Cell free   </th><th>    Cell culture   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   CRF02_AG  </td><td>   WT  </td><td>   −  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   100  </td><td>   100  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   117  </td><td>   69  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   49.1  </td><td>   8  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   E138K  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   86.5  </td><td>   91  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y/G118R  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   38.1  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R/E138K  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   64.9  </td><td>   32  </td></tr><tr><td>   B  </td><td>   WT  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   100  </td><td>   100  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   89  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   54.7  </td><td>   30  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   E138K  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   77  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y/G118R  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   82.3  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R/E138K  </td><td></td><td>   ++  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   46.8  </td><td>   43  </td></tr><tr><td>   C  </td><td>   WT  </td><td></td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   100  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   +++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   132  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   96.4  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   E138K  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   70.0  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   H51Y/G118R  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   32.2  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>   G118R/E138K  </td><td>   ++  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   +  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   −  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   93.1  </td><td>   ND  </td></tr></table>



