# Lersivirine, a Nonnucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor with Activity against Drug-Resistant Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 ^▿^ ^‡^

Romuald Corbau , ^1,^ ^\*^ Julie Mori , ^2^ Chris Phillips , ^3^ Lesley
Fishburn , ^1^ Alex Martin , ^1^ Charles Mowbray , ^3^ Wendy Panton ,
^1^ Caroline Smith-Burchnell , ^1^ Adele Thornberry , ^1^ Heather
Ringrose , ^3^ Thorsten Knöchel , ^3^ Steve Irving , ^3^ Mike Westby ,
^1^ Anthony Wood , ^3^ and Manos Perros ^1,^ ^†^

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer


## Associated Data

Supplementary Materials

:



## Abstract

The nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) are key
components of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for the
treatment of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). A major
problem with the first approved NNRTIs was the emergence of mutations in
the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT), in particular K103N and Y181C,
which led to resistance to the entire class. We adopted an iterative
strategy to synthesize and test small molecule inhibitors from a
chemical series of pyrazoles against wild-type (wt) RT and the most
prevalent NNRTI-resistant mutants. The emerging candidate, lersivirine
(UK-453,061), binds the RT enzyme in a novel way (resulting in a unique
resistance profile), inhibits over 60% of viruses bearing key RT
mutations, with 50% effective concentrations (EC ~50~ s) within 10-fold
of those for wt viruses, and has excellent selectivity against a range
of human targets. Altogether lersivirine is a highly potent and
selective NNRTI, with excellent efficacy against NNRTI-resistant
viruses.


##

Since it was first reported in 1981, AIDS has rapidly become a pandemic
fatal disease; in 2007, UNAIDS estimated that between 30 and 36 million
people globally were infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) and that every day more than 6,800 people become infected with
HIV-1 while more than 5,700 people die from AIDS ( 45 ). To date, no
cure exists to eliminate HIV.

The treatment of care known as highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) consists of a combination of at least three selected
antiretroviral drugs (taken from six different drug classes) that
inhibit the HIV replication cycle at the point of entry (chemokine
antagonists, fusion inhibitors), reverse transcription
(nucleoside/nucleotide and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors), integration (integrase inhibitors), or viral production
(protease inhibitors \[PIs\]).

The first drugs to be approved in the nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) class were delavirdine ( 18 , 40 ),
nevirapine (NVP) ( 22 , 31 ), and efavirenz ( 8 , 29 ). All three drugs
are efficacious at inhibiting HIV replication, but their use and
compliance are limited by serious side effects, frequently leading to
the rapid generation of resistance through single point mutations which
can confer class resistance ( 29 , 41 ). When observed in the clinical
setting, such mutations preclude the sequential use of NNRTIs in HAART
regimens ( 3 ).

Second-generation NNRTIs, which are either licensed or in clinical
development, retain activity against clinically significant
drug-resistant viruses ( 2 , 27 ). Most notably, clinical trials with
etravirine (TMC125) demonstrate that such second-generation NNRTIs can
contribute to virologic suppression in NNRTI-experienced patients and
can be useful additions to the armamentarium of drugs for the treating
physicians. However, the use of etravirine in first-line patients is
likely to be hampered by the potential for drug-drug interactions and a
relatively high rate of adverse effects (rash and nausea in particular),
as well as severe skin and hypersensitivity reactions, including cases
of hepatic failure ( 44 ). The efficacy of etravirine in treatment-naïve
patients remains to be established.

Efavirenz remains the current NNRTI of choice, with efavirenz-based
therapy or boosted PI-based therapy in combination with
nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) currently
recommended as first-line regimens for the treatment of HIV infection.
Well-tolerated, conveniently administered NNRTIs with activity against
drug-resistant virus could be equally useful in treating previously
untreated patients as well as those with a history of NNRTI failure.

In this report, we present the preclinical profile of a novel and potent
NNRTI, designated lersivirine (UK-453,061), which resulted from lead
optimization of a substituted pyrazole. Lersivirine has a novel mode of
binding to the enzyme, resulting in largely nonoverlapping resistance
with existing agents from the class. It is exquisitely selective against
a range of human targets, has broad-spectrum activity against primary
and lab-derived NNRTI-sensitive or NNRTI-resistant strains, and appears
to be additive or synergistic when used in combination with other
agents. Emergence of resistance to lersivirine requires multiple
mutations, and the resistant viruses are mostly sensitive to
first-generation NNRTI drugs. These antiviral results, along with other
preclinical data available to date, indicate that lersivirine should be
a convenient and effective therapy that is well tolerated by patients.



## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Compounds.

Lersivirine
\[5-(\[3,5-diethyl-1-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1H-pyrazol-4-yl\]oxy)isophthalonitrile\]
(structure shown in Fig. ​ Fig.1) 1 ) was synthesized at Pfizer Global
Research and Development Laboratories. Enfuvirtide was synthesized by
NeoMPS (Strasbourg, France). All other anti-HIV compounds were
synthesized at Pfizer Global Research and Development Laboratories. For
combination studies, abacavir, emtricitabine, tenofovir, and ritonavir
were obtained from Moravek Biochemicals, Brea, CA; didanosine (ddl) was
purchased from Sigma, Dorset, United Kingdom; and lamivudine (3TC) was
obtained from APIN Chem Ltd., Oxford, United Kingdom. For antiviral
assays, inhibitors were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).

FIG. 1.

Structure of lersivirine.

### Cells and viruses.

All cell lines and viruses, except where stated, were obtained from the
Centralized Facility for AIDS Reagents, National Institute for
Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire,
United Kingdom). The indicator cell line HeLaP4, expressing human
recombinant CD4, CCR5, and CXCR4, was kindly provided by Ned Landau
(Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, New York, NY). HeLaP4 cells were
cultured in Dulbecco\'s modified Eagle\'s medium (DMEM) containing 10%
heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS), 2 mM l -glutamine, 1 U/ml
penicillin, and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin. HEK293 (human embryonic kidney)
cells were maintained in DMEM containing 10% heat-inactivated FCS, 2 mM
l -glutamine, 1% nonessential amino acids (NEAAs), 1 mM sodium pyruvate,
1 U/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin. Puromycin, at a final
concentration of 0.5 μg/ml, was included in all HeLaP4 cultures. MT-2
(human T-cell leukemia) and SupT1 (non-Hodgkin\'s T-cell lymphoma
subclone) cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10%
heat-inactivated FCS, 2 mM l -glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 0.1
mg/ml streptomycin. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were
isolated by Ficoll-Paque gradient separation (Amersham Pharmacia
Biotech, Piscataway, NJ) from pooled buffy coats (North London and South
London Blood Transfusion Services, United Kingdom) from three or four
HIV-1- and hepatitis B virus-seronegative donors per batch. PBMCs were
stimulated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA; Murex, Abbott Laboratories) at
1.5 μg/ml for 3 days in RPMI 1640 medium containing heat-inactivated 10%
FCS, 2 mM l -glutamine, 1 U/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin.
All cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified incubator with a 5% CO
~2~ atmosphere.

NL4-3 infectious virus was generated following transfection of the
plasmid pNL4-3 (National Institute of Health AIDS Research and Reference
Reagent Program; https://www.aidsreagent.org ), which contains a
full-length HIV-1 genome constructed from two North American isolates
(5′ sequence derived from NY5 and 3′ sequence derived from LAV) ( 1 )
into HEK293 cells. Similarly, NL4-3 mutant viruses, modified to contain
NNRTI resistance-associated mutations, were generated by transfection of
the mutated plasmid. NL4-3 virus stocks were expanded by limited
passaging in SupT1 cells. Stocks of the HIV-1 laboratory-adapted strain
Ba-L and primary isolates 92BR017 (clade B), 98IN022 (clade C), 93BR029
(clade F), and RU570 (clade G) were prepared by limited passaging in
PHA-stimulated PBMCs.

### Site-directed mutants.

DNA encoding the histidine-tagged reverse transcriptase (RT) (p66) and
protease genes (HIV-1, BH10 strain) were cloned into the expression
vector pT5m and kindly provided by Stephen Hughes ( 19 ). Specific amino
acid replacements were made using the QuikChange site-directed
mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). Following mutagenesis, the entire mutant
RT coding sequence was verified by sequencing the corresponding
plasmids. RT plasmids containing mutations at the following locations
were constructed: L100I, K101E, V106A, V108I, E138K, Y181C, Y181I,
M184V, F227L, F227C, E233V, L234I, P236L, V106A/F227L, Y181C/Y188C,
Y181I/Y188L, and V106A/Y181C. The mutated RT genes were used to
construct recombinant NL4-3 mutant viruses by replacing the RT gene in
pNL4-3 with the corresponding gene from the mutant pT5m-RT clone.
Plasmids were sequenced to verify mutations (Lark Technologies, Essex,
United Kingdom).

### RT expression and purification.

For expression, either wild-type (wt) or mutant RT plasmids were
transfected in supercompetent BL21(DE3) cells (Stratagene). After
induction with isopropyl-β- d -thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) (1 mM
final), wt protein and each mutant protein were purified from bacterial
lysates using nickel chelate affinity chromatography (Hi-Trap chelating
column) followed by Mono Q chromatography. Fractions containing p66/p51
heterodimeric RT were pooled, concentrated using Centriprep 30, and
stored at −80°C.

### RT enzyme assays.

The activities of lersivirine and efavirenz against wt and mutant HIV-1
RT (BH10 strain) were determined using a primer extension assay
incorporating a DNA/RNA primer/template as described previously ( 25 ).
The 5′ biotinylated primer DNA is a 16mer oligo(dT), which is annealed
to a poly(rA) template of approximately 300 bases in length.
Incorporation of \[ ^3^ H\]TTP (dTTP) by reverse transcription results
in extension of the primer. During the reaction the primer/template is
bound to a streptavidin-coated flashplate (NEN). The incorporated
tritiated nucleotides can then stimulate the scintillant to produce a
signal that is measured using a scintillation counter. Compounds that
inhibit the RNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity of RT produce a
reduced signal. A dose response curve can then be used to calculate the
50% inhibitory concentration (IC ~50~ ).

### ITC.

Recombinant HIV-1 RT was prepared to suitable concentrations for
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) (typically 13.2 to 13.9 μM) using
Microcon-10 microconcentrators (Amicon). ITC experiments were performed
twice at 25°C in 5% DMSO using a MicroCal VP-ITC, with 215 μM
lersivirine titrated into HIV-1 RT over 25 injections of 10 μl, made
every 230 s, into a fixed reaction cell volume of 1.4272 ml.

### X-ray crystallography.

Heterodimeric wt and K103N HIV-1 RT were expressed and purified as
described previously ( 28 ) and crystallized in the presence of
lersivirine. The crystals belong to space group C222 ~1~ (unit cell
dimensions: a ≈ 117 Å, b ≈ 154 Å, and c ≈ 155 Å) and are isomorphous
with those reported previously ( 24 ). X-ray diffraction data, to 2.8 Å
and 3.2 Å resolution, were collected at 100 K with an ADSC Quantum 4 CCD
detector at Station 14.2 of SRS, Daresbury, United Kingdom, and "in
house" using a Rigaku FRD generator and Saturn92 detector. Data
processing and scaling were carried out using the CCP4 suite of programs
( 5 ). The structures were determined by molecular replacement and
difference. Fourier methods using the coordinate set 1 fkp ( 36 ) as the
starting model. Interactive graphical model building was carried out
with Quanta (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA) and Coot ( 14 ), with
iterative rounds of refinement carried out using CNX (Accelrys Inc., San
Diego, CA) and Buster ( 39 ).

In both structures the ligand was well defined by the initial electron
density maps. In refinement, the option of applying additional
restraints to a previous higher-resolution target structure (available
in Buster 1.7.2) was used, and only group B factors were refined for the
lower-resolution structure. Data and refinement statistics are listed in
Table S1 in the supplemental material.

### Human DNA polymerase β assay.

The activity of lersivirine against human DNA polymerase was determined
using a primer extension assay. A 5′ biotinylated 16mer oligo(dT) primer
DNA was annealed to a poly(dA) template and was extended during
incubation with human DNA polymerase. Incorporation of \[ ^3^ H\]TTP was
detected by scintillation.

### Drug susceptibility assays.

The antiviral activity of lersivirine against the HIV-1 strain NL4-3 wt
and a panel of NL4-3 recombinant viruses with NNRTI
resistance-associated mutations was determined using the indicator cell
line, HeLaP4. The adherent HeLaP4 cells were detached with cell
dissociation solution (CDS; Sigma), resuspended in culture medium, and
exposed to virus. Infected cultures were added to triplicate wells of a
96-well plate at 4.5 × 10 ^3^ cells/well containing serial dilutions of
test compound in culture medium. After a 5-day culture, virus
replication was quantified by measuring levels of HIV-1 Tat-induced
galactosidase (FluorAce β-galactosidase reporter assay; Bio-Rad).

Drug susceptibility testing of the laboratory-adapted strain Ba-L and
primary isolates was performed in PHA-stimulated PBMCs. Cells were
infected for 1 h at 37°C using a predetermined volume of virus
calculated to give comparable multiplicities of infection (MOI) (0.01 to
0.1) or equivalent amounts of RT activity per infection. Infected cells
were washed and resuspended in medium containing 10 ng/ml human
recombinant interleukin-2 (IL-2) (R&D Systems) and added to duplicate
wells of 24-well plates (3.6 × 10 ^5^ cells/well) or triplicate wells of
96-well plates (3.6 × 10 ^4^ cells/well) containing serial dilutions of
test compound in culture medium. After 5 to 7 days of incubation, virus
replication was quantified by measuring supernatant p24 levels (HIV
monoclonal antibody \[MAb\] p24 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
\[ELISA\]; Murex, Abbott Diagnostics) or RT activity (Quant-T-RT assay;
GE Healthcare). Any compound-specific cytotoxicity was assessed in
parallel (see "Cytotoxicity testing" below).

For all drug susceptibility assays, the percent virus inhibition at each
compound concentration was calculated and sigmoidal dose-response curves
were fitted using a proprietary curve-fitting program to determine the
anti-HIV-1 50% and 90% effective concentrations (EC ~50~ and EC ~90~ ,
respectively).

### MOI assays.

Antiviral drug susceptibility assays were performed in MT-2 cells to
assess the *in vitro* effect of virus input on antiviral potency.
Briefly, cells were infected with a predetermined volume of virus
calculated to an MOI of 0.005, 0.05, or 0.5 50% tissue culture infective
dose (TCID ~50~ ) per cell. Infected cells were added to duplicate wells
of 96-well plates (1.8 × 10 ^4^ cells/well) containing serial dilutions
of test compound in culture medium. After 6 days of incubation, virus
replication was measured indirectly by assessing cell viability (Cell
Titer-Glo; Promega). The NNRTIs etravirine and efavirenz, the PI
indinavir, and the investigative maturation inhibitor PA-457 were
included as controls in the assay. The percent inhibition of
virus-induced cell death for each concentration at each MOI was used to
determine the anti-HIV-1 EC ~50~ and EC ~90~ .

### Drug combination studies.

The *in vitro* antiviral effect of lersivirine in combination with
representatives of the NRTIs (abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine,
lamivudine, tenofovir, and zidovudine), the PIs (atazanavir, lopinavir,
and ritonavir), the entry inhibitor (enfuvirtide), or the integrase
inhibitors (raltegravir and elvitegravir) was evaluated in HIV-1 NL4-3
wt acutely infected MT-2 cells (MOI, 0.05 to 0.1 TCID ~50~ per cell).
Infected cells (8 × 10 ^3^ cells/well) were plated into a 384-well assay
plate containing serial dilutions of lersivirine and the test compound
prepared in 0.05% Pluronic acid (Sigma). Virus growth was determined
indirectly after a 5-day culture by measuring the metabolic activity of
viable cells (Cell Titer-Glo luminescent cell viability assay kit;
Promega). Data were analyzed using the MacSynergy II three-dimensional
model of Prichard and Shipman ( 34 ). Combinations of test compound
titrated against itself were assayed in parallel; lersivirine data were
reported only when the "sham" combinations indicated additive
interactions.

### Phenotypic resistance profiling.

Drug susceptibility was determined using cell-based pseudovirus assays
at Virco (Antivirogram assay; Mechelen, Belgium) and Monogram
Biosciences Inc. (PhenoSense HIV assay; South San Francisco, CA). In
both assays, the HIV-1 RT gene is amplified from virus samples by PCR
analysis and the resultant amplicons are inserted into HIV-1-derived
expression vectors lacking the RT gene. Through a process of gene
transfer (Nucleofectin; Virco) or cotransfection with an expression
vector encoding the Env proteins (Monogram Biosciences Inc.), infectious
virus particles are produced. The ability of the pseudovirus to infect
target cells in the presence or absence of various concentrations of
inhibitors is measured. The Virco Antivirogram assay was used to
determine susceptibility against a panel of 191 HIV-1 isolates derived
from the plasma of treatment-naïve and
antiretroviral-treatment-experienced individuals chosen to identify a
comprehensive phenotypic resistance profile for lersivirine. Three
different virus panels were investigated at Monogram Biosciences using
the PhenoSense HIV assay: 100 HIV-1 isolates derived from NNRTI
treatment-experienced patients failing on a PI regimen, 62 HIV-1
isolates derived from NNRTI treatment-naïve patients with evidence of
genotypic (transmitted) resistance to efavirenz, 45 HIV-1 isolates
derived from NNRTI treatment-naïve patients representing different viral
clades (A, A1, B, C, D, F1, and G), circulating recombinant forms (CRF)
(AE, AG, and BF), and recombinant forms (C/H). Twenty-five of the
viruses were clade C, 5 were clade B, 5 were CRF BF, and the remaining
were A, A1, AE, C/H, D, F1, and G.

The distribution of NNRTI mutations in 353 clinically derived
recombinant HIV isolates (191 isolates from Virco combined with the 100
and 62 isolates from Monogram Biosciences) is shown in Table ​ Table1. 1
. It should be noted that the proportion of each mutant in the panel of
viruses tested may not reflect the incidence of these mutants in the
HIV-1 drug-experienced patient population. Mutations at the following
locations in RT have been previously described as conferring resistance
to NNRTIs: A98G, L100I, K101E, K103N, V106A, V108I, V179D/E, Y181C/I,
Y188L/C/H, G190A/S/E/Q, P225H, F227L, M230L, L234I, P236L, and Y318F (
23 , 30 , 42 ). In total, 488 NNRTI mutations at the codons listed above
were detected in 228 of the 353 isolates (Table ​ (Table1). 1 ). In some
virus isolates, a particular codon contained a mixture of NNRTI mutant
and wt sequences, indicating the presence of multiple viral
quasi-species in the sample. For the purposes of analysis, these
positions were scored as containing an NNRTI mutation. Linkages between
mutations in viruses containing \>1 NNRTI mutation are not represented.

### TABLE 1.

Prevalence of NNRTI-specific mutations in recombinant HIV-1 isolates
^*a*^

Mutation

No. of viruses containing mutation ^*b*^

\% of total mutations ^*c*^

No. of mutation mixtures ^*d*^

A98G

24

5

7

L100I

24

5

4

K101E

23

5

6

K103N

166

34

18

V106A

12

2

3

V108I

23

5

7

V179D

5

1

2

Y181C/I

71

15

11

Y188L

17

3

3

Y188C

8

2

3

G190A/S

59

12

12

G190E/Q

8

2

1

P225H

16

3

6

F227L

10

2

1

M230L

11

2

3

L234I

1

0

0

P236L

2

0

1

Y318F ^*e*^

8

2

1

Total

488

100

89

Open in a separate window

^a^ Mutations present in the population at a low frequency (e.g., Y188H,
K101P, etc.) were not included in this analysis.

^b^ Singly or in combination with other NNRTI-specific mutations.

^c^ *n* = 488.

^d^ Mixture of mutant and wt virus detected.

^e^ Mutation Y318F was not investigated at Monogram Biosciences.

### BCO.

The biological cutoff (BCO) for virus susceptibility has been calculated
using the same method as described previously ( 48 ). Applying this
method to the 63 wt clinical isolates tested here, the calculated BCOs
are 3.1 for lersivirine, 1.75 for efavirenz, 6.63 for delavirdine, and
5.86 for nevirapine. The BCO values were subsequently used to establish
sensitivity.

### *In vitro* resistance selection.

For inhibitor escalation studies, SupT1 cells were initially infected
with HIV-1 NL4-3 wt (MOI, 7.4 TCID ~50~ per cell) for 1 h at 37°C and
the virus-infected cells were passaged weekly in SupT1 cells in the
presence of increasing concentrations of lersivirine from a starting
concentration of 5 nM (IC ~50~ in this assay system) in 12-well plates
(6 × 10 ^5^ cells/well). Throughout the passaging period, ongoing virus
replication was monitored weekly by observing cytopathic effects
(syncytia). Every 7 days, virus supernatant was passaged onto fresh
cells at the same density with fresh lersivirine-containing medium. The
concentration of lersivirine was increased by 2-fold and 5-fold that of
the previous concentration upon subsequent passage whenever evidence of
viral replication was observed. Virus stocks for phenotypic
characterization were produced in SupT1 cells in the absence of compound
and were tested for their sensitivity to lersivirine in an antiviral
assay using HeLaP4 cells as previously described. In addition, virus
supernatants (harvested during passaging) were sent to Monogram
Biosciences for testing in their PhenoSense and GeneSeq assays.
Drug-free passages were set up in parallel to control for changes in
sensitivity to lersivirine upon prolonged culturing of virus. In
addition, virus passaging in the presence of efavirenz was set up in
parallel.

For fixed-dose studies, SupT1 cells were initially infected with HIV-1
NL4-3 wt or the RT site-directed K103N and Y181C mutants (MOI, 0.1 TCID
~50~ per cell) for 1 h at 37°C and the virus-infected cells cultured in
the presence of fixed concentrations of lersivirine representing a range
of EC ~50~ multiples (10×, 20×, and 100×; EC ~50~ , 9.52 nM in this
assay system) in 24-well plates (3.6 × 10 ^5^ cells/well). Cultures were
fed fresh uninfected cells and fresh compound, maintaining the same
final compound concentration, every 7 days. Throughout the passaging
period (21 days), virus replication was quantified by observing
syncytia. Breakthrough virus was harvested when \>25% of the culture
showed evidence of syncytia formation. The virus supernatant was sent to
Monogram Biosciences for testing in their PhenoSense and GeneSeq assays.
Drug-free passages were set up in parallel to control for changes in
sensitivity to lersivirine upon prolonged culture of virus. In addition,
virus was passaged in the presence of efavirenz and etravirine.

### Cytotoxicity testing.

The potential toxic activity of lersivirine in HeLaP4 cells and
peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) was determined using the cell titer
96 aqueous nonradioactive cell proliferation assay (Promega). In these
assays, HeLaP4 cells or PBL were cultivated for 5 days under conditions
identical to those used in their respective antiviral assays, except
that no virus was added to the cells. Assays were performed according to
the manufacturer\'s instructions using a range of concentrations of
lersivirine (with a maximum concentration of 200 μM).

### Activity of lersivirine against potential human target proteins in selectivity screening assays.

The specificity of lersivirine was tested against various receptors and
enzymes using Cerep\'s BioPrint service (see the Cerep website for more
information). The list of targets against which lersivirine was profiled
is presented in the supplemental material.

### Protein Data Bank accession numbers.

Coordinates and reflection files were deposited in the Protein Data Bank
under accession numbers 2 won and 2 wom.



## RESULTS

### Lersivirine is a potent and selective nonnucleoside reverse transcription inhibitor.

Lersivirine and efavirenz were initially tested ( *n* = 20) for *in
vitro* inhibitory activity against purified wt RT using a primer
extension assay, and both were found to be potent inhibitors of the RT
activity of HIV-1 wt RT, with geometric mean IC ~50~ s of 118 nM (95%
confidence interval \[CI\], 100 to 139 nM) and 7.2 nM (95% CI, 4.4 to
11.9 nM) for lersivirine and efavirenz, respectively.

The binding affinity of lersivirine to RT was characterized using
isothermal calorimetry (ITC) (Fig. ​ (Fig.2). 2 ). Two independent ITC
experiments were conducted, demonstrating that lersivirine binds to
recombinant HIV-1 RT at 25°C with a mean geometric dissociation constant
( *K ~D~* ) of 624 nM (standard error, 42.5 nM). The derived
stoichiometry of the interaction is consistent with a 1:1 binding
mechanism. It is interesting to note that the binding of lersivirine is
enthalpy driven (Δ *H* \[change in enthalpy\] = −2.305 × 104 cal/mol ±
3.01 × 103; Δ *S* \[change in entropy\] = −48.9 cal/K/mol ± 9.9). This
indicates that upon binding of lersivirine to the viral RT there is a
decrease in entropy of the system, possibly due to a decrease in the
mobility of a portion of the protein.

FIG. 2.

Typical example of a titration of lersivirine into recombinant wt HIV-1
RT at 25°C in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide. In this example, *K ~D~* was 668 nM
± 12%, Δ *H* was −2E4 ± 528.9, and Δ *S* was −38.97.

Consistent with the findings described above, the mechanism of
inhibition of the RT enzyme by lersivirine was confirmed in kinetic
experiments as "mixed noncompetitive" (as for other NNRTIs), with a
geometric mean *K ~i~* value of 117 nM and a geometric mean *K ~i~*
value of 340 nM (data not shown). Finally, the effect of increasing
viral MOI on the antiviral potency (EC ~50~ ) of lersivirine following
infection of MT-2 cells with wt NL4-3 is summarized in Table ​ Table2. 2
. We showed that lersivirine is able to inhibit HIV-1 virus replication,
with an EC ~50~ ranging from 5 nM to 35 nM against an MOI ranging from
0.005 to 0.5. A shift of \<10-fold in potency across a 100-fold virus
input is similar to that observed for two other NNRTIs, efavirenz and
etravirine, tested in parallel, and consistent with its mode of action
(MOA) being in the early stages of viral replication. In contrast,
indinavir (a PI) and PA-457 (a maturation inhibitor) demonstrated shifts
of \>130 and \>101, respectively, in the same assays.

### TABLE 2.

Impact of viral input on compound EC ~50~ across a 100-fold range of MOI

Compound ( *n* )

MOI

EC ~50~ (nM)

Lower 95% CI (nM)

Upper 95% CI (nM)

EC ~50~ fold change over MOI range

Lersivirine (5)

0.005

5.04

1.9

13.0

6.9

0.05

13.1

5.99

28.6

0.5

34.9

18.1

67.3

Efavirenz (5)

0.005

0.515

0.228

1.17

4.3

0.05

0.908

0.437

1.89

0.5

2.20

1.42

3.41

Etravirine (3)

0.005

1.56

0.343

7.12

2.9

0.05

2.58

0.780

8.55

0.5

4.56

2.24

9.30

Indinavir (3)

0.005

4.87

1.35

17.6

\>130

0.05

12.7

3.77

42.6

0.5

\>500

NA ^*a*^

NA

PA-457 (5)

0.005

39.6

19.5

80.6

\>101

0.05

119

74.2

191

0.5

\>4,000

NA

NA

Open in a separate window

^a^ NA, not available.

To confirm the selectivity of lersivirine for HIV-1 RT, we evaluated the
activity of lersivirine against human DNA polymerase beta. Lersivirine
is a very weak inhibitor of human DNA polymerase beta, with an
extrapolated geometric mean IC ~50~ of approximately 20 mM resulting in
a predicted selectivity index (defined as the IC ~50~ against DNA
polymerase beta divided by the IC ~50~ against RT) of 166,000. An
additional 28 human receptors and enzymes were also profiled for
susceptibility to lersivirine, with no human target proteins being
significantly modulated at concentrations of up to 10 μM (data not
shown), with the exception of the human phosphodiesterase IV, which
displayed an IC ~50~ of 13 μM. Finally, the cytotoxicity of lersivirine
for exponentially growing HeLaP4 cells as well as primary blood cells
was determined using a cell titer 96 aqueous nonradioactive cell
proliferation assay. No cell cytotoxicity was observed at the highest
concentration of lersivirine tested in HeLaP4 cells (200 μM), while in
PBMCs lersivirine had a median 30% cytotoxicity (CC ~30~ ) of greater
than 96.9 μM (lower quartile = 82.4 μM; upper quartile \> 200 μM). The
ratio between the CC ~30~ and the antiviral EC ~90~ is greater than
7,000 (\>7,092 in HeLaP4 cells and equal to 9,818 in PBL).

### Lersivirine binds HIV-1 RT in a novel binding mode and retains activity against commonly encountered mutations in the RT enzyme.

The binding mode of lersivirine to the recombinant wt HIV-1 RT protein
(strain HXB2) was further investigated using protein X-ray
crystallography. The X-ray structure confirmed that lersivirine binds
noncovalently to the allosteric, nonnucleoside binding site of
recombinant wt HIV-1 RT, as illustrated in Fig. ​ Fig.3A 3A .

FIG. 3.

Crystal structure of lersivirine bound to HIV-1 RT. (A) Lersivirine
bound at the nonnucleoside binding site of recombinant HIV-1 RT. pink,
wt; green, K103N mutant. (B) Overlay of NNRTI binding pocket for
lersivirine (green) and nevirapine (red), showing the change in
conformation of Y181. (C) wt structure viewed looking down on W229 in
the plane of the disubstituted phenol ring of lersi- virine. The
residues F227 and V108, the positions of resistance mutations, are
highlighted. These residues make apolar van der Waals packing
interactions with the compound.

Detailed analysis of this binding indicates that lersivirine forms
interactions with residues L100, V106, Y181, Y188, F227, W229, Y318,
L234, and P236 of the p66 subunit of RT. Interestingly, Y181 is rotated
approximately 100° around χ1 with respect to the conformation found in
complexes with nevirapine or efavirenz (Fig. ​ (Fig.3B). 3B ). This Y181
rotation in lersivirine-bound RT protein is similar to the rotation
found in the apostructure. V108 makes extensive van der Waals
interactions with the dicyano-substituted phenol moiety of lersivirine.
Mutations to larger residues at the 108 position are predicted to
perturb the observed binding mode (Fig. ​ (Fig.3C). 3C ). The binding
mode of lersivirine to the key K103N mutant of HIV-1 RT was then
investigated using the same technique. As depicted in Fig. ​ Fig.3A, 3A ,
the binding of lersivirine to the mutant enzyme is similar to the
binding mode of lersivirine to the wt enzyme, consistent with
lersivirine retaining activity against this key NNRTI-resistant
mutation. Indeed, when tested in the RT elongation assay, lersivirine
inhibited K103N RT with an IC ~50~ of 215 nm (95% CI, 150 to 309%),
which is within 2-fold of that observed for the wt enzyme. In contrast,
efavirenz inhibited K103N RT with an IC ~50~ of 414 nm (95% CI, 268 to
640%), a marked reduction of approximately 60-fold compared with that of
wt RT and in agreement with what has been reported previously ( 50 ).

These experiments were then extended to include a panel of 19 single and
double point mutant RTs (Fig. ​ (Fig.4A). 4A ). The mutations were chosen
to represent those most frequently found in samples from
NNRTI-experienced patients ( 32 , 42 , 47 ). Lersivirine was shown to
inhibit 14 out of 15 single point mutant RTs (L100I, K101E, K103N,
V106A, V108I, E138K, Y181C, Y181I, M184V, Y188C, F227L, E233V, L234I,
and P236L) with IC ~50~ s within 10-fold of those measured for the wt
enzyme, compared with only 8 out of 15 for efavirenz. The activity of
both efavirenz and lersivirine was significantly reduced against F227C
(20.2-fold and 44.3-fold increase in IC ~50~ , respectively). In
addition to the activity against the mutant described above, the
activity of efavirenz was also significantly reduced against L100I,
Y181C, Y181I, E233V, and L234I RT enzymes, consistent with previous
reports ( 10 , 12 ).

FIG. 4.

Activity of lersivirine against a panel of mutant RT enzymes and
viruses. (A) Lersivirine and efavirenz were tested against a panel of
mutant RT enzymes, and their respective fold difference versus wt RT was
plotted. White bars, efavirenz; black bars, lersivirine. (B) *xy* plot
of the log of the fold difference of the activity of lersivirine against
mutant RTs versus the log of the activity of lersivirine against the
corresponding mutant NL4-3 viruses.

Of the four double mutants tested, the Y181C/Y188C mutant was sensitive
(a \<10-fold increase in IC ~50~ compared to that for the wt) to both
efavirenz and lersivirine, while lersivirine alone was active against
the V106A/Y181C double mutant RTs. Both lersivirine and efavirenz had
reduced activity against the double mutant V106A/F227L (47.9- and
13.1-fold drop in potency, respectively) and Y181I/Y188L (56.5- and
37.4-fold drop in potency, respectively) RTs.

The same mutations were then introduced into the infectious recombinant
NL-4.3 virus background, and their susceptibilities to lersivirine and
efavirenz were determined on an indicator HeLaP4 cell line, measuring
levels of HIV-1 Tat-induced β-galactosidase 5 days following infection
(Fig. ​ (Fig.4B). 4B ). Lersivirine inhibited replication of the wt
virus, with a geometric mean EC ~50~ of 3.96 nM, while the EC ~50~ for
the K103N mutant virus was 7.05 nM. Fifteen of the 19 mutated viruses
investigated (L100I, K101E, K103N, V106A, V108I, E138K, Y181C, Y181I,
M184V, Y188C, F227L, E233V, P236L, V106A/Y181C, and Y181C/Y188C) were
sensitive to inhibition by lersivirine, with an EC ~50~ within 10-fold
of that for the wt virus, including the amino acid substitution M184V,
which commonly arises in response to treatment with NRTI. Reduced
susceptibility to lersivirine was seen with the substitutions L234I
(∼20-fold), F227C (∼55-fold), Y181I/Y188L (∼65-fold), and V106A/F227L
(\>200-fold), which is consistent with the effect of the same
substitutions on the activity of lersivirine against the RT enzyme (Fig.
​(Fig.4B 4B ).

### Lersivirine inhibits clinically relevant viral strains.

To further extend the antiviral characterization of lersivirine, its
activity was evaluated against three panels of viruses containing
clinically relevant mutations. In these panels, the compound was
assessed against 353 clinically derived recombinant viruses using either
Virco\'s Antivirogram assay (191 clinical isolates) or Monogram
Bioscience\'s PhenoSense HIV assay (162 clinical isolates). Sensitivity
was assessed using the BCO values calculated for each compound, and the
results are summarized in Tables ​ Tables3 3 and ​ and4. 4 . Of the 353
viruses tested, 290 contained one or more NNRTI-specific mutation
(summarized in Table ​ Table1). 1 ). Out of 63 viruses with no NNRTI
mutations, 94% were either wt or contained mutations conferring
resistance to NRTI or PI and were sensitive to lersivirine, with a
geometric mean fold change from the control of 1.0-fold (95% CI, 0.9- to
1.2-fold change). Sensitivity to lersivirine was also retained in 62% of
viruses containing only 1 NNRTI mutation (21% for efavirenz), 20% of
viruses containing 2 NNRTI mutations (4% for efavirenz), and 11% of
viruses containing ≥3 NNRTI mutations (0% for efavirenz).

### TABLE 3.

No. of NNRTI mutations and lersivirine, efavirenz (EFV), delavirdine
(DLV), and nevirapine (NVP) resistance profiles ^*a*^

No. of NNRTI mutations ( *n* )

\% of viruses remaining sensitive to indicated drug (BCO)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lersivirine (3.1)

EFV (1.75)

NVP (6.63)

DLV (5.86)

0 (63)

94

89

95

95

1 (147)

62

21

24

40

2 (90)

20

4

2

17

≥3 (53)

11

0

0

13

Open in a separate window

^a^ A total of 353 cloned clinical isolates in Virco\'s Antivirogram
assay (191 viruses) and in Monogram Bioscience\'s PhenoSense assay (162
viruses) were evaluated. Viruses have been grouped according to the
number of NNRTI-specific mutations detected by genotypic analysis. In
each case the percentage of viruses that remained sensitive (i.e., had
an EC ~50~ \<10 times that of the control virus) is shown.

### TABLE 4.

Type of HIV-1 isolate mutation and lersivirine, efavirenz (EFV),
delavirdine (DLV), and nevirapine (NVP) resistance profiles ^*a*^

HIV-1 isolate mutation ( *n* )

\% of viruses remaining sensitive to indicated drug (BCO)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lersivirine (3.1)

EFV (1.75)

NVP (6.63)

DLV (5.86)

None (63)

94

89

95

95

Any (290)

40

12

13

28

K103N alone (69)

80

7

10

13

K103N with any mutation but not Y181C or G190A (127)

48

4

6

7

Y181C alone (14)

57

43

14

14

Y181C with any mutation but not K103N or G190A (22)

45

32

9

10

G190A alone (13)

46

0

0

100

G190A with any mutation but not K103N or Y181C (22)

36

0

0

91

Open in a separate window

^a^ Viruses have been grouped according to the absence of any
NNRTI-specific mutation, the presence of any NNRTI-specific mutation,
and the presence of one of three mutations, K103N, Y181C, or G190A,
either alone or in the presence of any other mutation except the
corresponding other two mutations from the K103N, Y181C, and G190A
mutations. Mutations K103N, Y181C, and G190A are of key clinical
relevance as they occur in the majority of patients failing NNRTI
therapy. Table 1 lists the mutations used for this analysis. For each
genotype, the percentage of viruses that remained sensitive (i.e., an EC
~50~ \<10 times that of HIV NL4-3 control virus) is shown.

Consistent with its binding mode and single directed mutant data
described above, lersivirine retained activity against 80% of viruses
with genotypes containing K103N as a single NNRTI mutation (versus 7%
for efavirenz), 57% of viruses with genotypes containing Y181C as a
single NNRTI mutation (43% for efavirenz), and 46% of viruses with
genotypes containing G190A as a single NNRTI mutation (0% for
efavirenz). This improved resistance profile of lersivirine relative to
efavirenz was retained for viruses in which the primary mutations were
present with other NNRTI-resistant mutations: for K103N, 48% of viruses
were sensitive to lersivirine versus 4% in the case of efavirenz; for
Y181C, 45% viruses were sensitive versus 32%; and for G190A, 36% viruses
were sensitive versus 0% in the presence of any other NNRTI mutations.
Overall, the data from Virco\'s Antivirogram and Monogram Bioscience\'s
PhenoSense assays demonstrate that lersivirine retains inhibitory
activity against a range of clinically derived NNRTI-resistant viruses,
in particular viruses containing the substitution K103N, Y181C, or
G190A, either alone or in combination with other NNRTI mutations.

### Lersivirine is active in primary blood cell assays and against viruses of different clades and diverse geographical origins.

The antiviral activity of lersivirine was assessed in acutely infected
PBL. In these experiments, lersivirine inhibited the replication of
strain Ba-L in PBL, with a geometric mean EC ~50~ equal to 3.38 nM (95%
CI, 2.26 to 5.05 nM) and an EC ~90~ equal to 9.87 nM (95% CI, 6.63 to
14.7 nM), with no cytotoxicity observed up to 50 μM (median CC ~30~ \>
96.9 μM, lower quartile of 82.4 μM and upper quartile of \>200 μM).

The activity of lersivirine against viruses representing different viral
clades was also investigated using a panel of 45 pseudotyped clade B and
nonclade B viruses from different geographical origins in the PhenoSense
assay (Table ​ (Table5). 5 ). All viruses were found to be susceptible to
lersivirine, with EC ~50~ fold changes within 2-fold of that for the
reference virus, with the exception of one CRF BF and one clade C
strain; both demonstrated fold change values within 10-fold (2.3- and
6.3-fold changes, respectively).

### TABLE 5.

Lersivirine activity against different HIV-1 clades ^*a*^

HIV-1 clade ( *n* )

Geographical origin(s)

Lersivirine activity

------------------------------------------------------------------------

EC ~50~ fold change

95% CI range

A (A1, AE, AG) (6)

Australia, Canada, Netherlands, Poland, South Africa, United Kingdom

1.12

0.89-1.40

B (5)

Australia ^*d*^ , Canada, Poland, United States

0.82

0.54-1.26

BF (5)

Argentina ^*e*^

1.02 ^*b*^

0.51-2.02

C (25)

South Africa ^*f*^ , Australia, Canada, Puerto Rico, United Kingdom,
United States

1.07 ^*c*^

0.88-1.30

CH (1)

South Africa

0.62

NA

D (1)

United Kingdom

1.02

NA

F1 (1)

Argentina

1.54

NA

G (1)

United Kingdom

1.05

NA

Total (45)

1.03

0.91-1.18

Open in a separate window

^a^ Sensitivity of clinically derived virus isolates representing
different viral subtypes from treatment-naïve patients to lersivirine.
Lersivirine was profiled against 45 cloned clinical isolates in Monogram
Bioscience\'s PhenoSense assay. Geometric mean EC ~50~ fold changes from
that for the wt reference virus are reported with 95% confidence
interval (CI) ranges. NA, not available.

^b^ One circulating recombinant form BF virus showed an EC ~50~ fold
change of 2.3.

^c^ One clade C virus showed an EC ~50~ fold change of 6.3.

^d^ Two clade B viruses tested from Australia.

^e^ Five clade BF viruses tested from Argentina.

^f^ Twenty clade C viruses tested from South Africa.

### Development of *in vitro* viral resistance to lersivirine requires a distinct resistance pathway.

To characterize the genotypic pathway leading to lersivirine resistance,
NL4-3 virus was cultured in SupT1 cells using increasing concentrations
of lersivirine (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). By week 11,
the virus was able to grow in concentrations of lersivirine that were up
to 500-fold higher than the original EC ~50~ . Two independent virus
cultures led to distinct paths to resistance (Table ​ (Table6), 6 ), with
EC ~50~ shifts of 60.5-fold ("path a") and 143-fold ("path b") when
tested in the PhenoSense assay. Sequencing of the corresponding RT genes
revealed that at passage 9, substitutions V108I and E138K appeared in
association with the development of resistance to lersivirine; however,
resistance to lersivirine may have occurred at an earlier passage. By
passage 11 (path a), the level of resistance had increased further with
the addition of F227F/L, while virus from path b contains V108I in
association with three further RT mutations: H221Y, F227F/L, and
M230M/I.

### TABLE 6.

Lersivirine-resistant virus carrying multiple RT mutations and inhibited
by other NNRTIs ^*a*^

Virus stock ^*b*^

Passage no. ^*c*^

RT mutations

Fold change in EC ~50~ from that for drug-sensitive reference virus of
indicated drug ^*d*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lersivirine

EFV

DLV

NVP

ZDV

Passaged control

11

0.6

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

Lersivirine ^+^

9 (a)

V108I, E138K

14.0

1.0

1.5

0.9

0.4

11 (a)

V108I, E138K, F227F/L

143

3.2

1.8

12.2

0.6

11 (b)

V108I, H221Y, F227F/L, M230 M/I

60.5

2.4

0.2

6.4

0.1

Efavirenz ^+^

11

L100I, K103Q, H221H/Y

5.0

16.3

16.4

1.0

0.1

Open in a separate window

^a^ Mutations were identified in the GeneSeq HIV (PR/RT) assay at
Monogram Biosciences. Susceptibilities to lersivirine, efavirenz (EFV),
delavirdine (DLV), and nevirapine (NVP) were determined in Monogram
Bioscience\'s PhenoSense assay. The NRTI zidovudine (ZDV) was used as a
control. No time points before passage 9 were investigated.

^b^ Passaged control, virus passaged in the absence of compound;
lersivirine ^+^ , virus passaged in the presence of increasing
concentrations of lersivirine; efavirenz ^+^ , virus passaged in the
presence of increasing concentrations of efavirenz.

^c^ The two different pathways to resistance are labeled a and b (in
parentheses).

^d^ The drug-sensitive virus CNDO was used as the reference virus for
estimation of fold change in EC ~50~ .

To understand the potential genetic pathway to resistance from viruses
with preexisting NNRTI resistance-associated mutations, K103N and Y181C
mutant NL4-3 viruses (along with a wt control) were cultured in SupT1
cells for up to 21 days using fixed concentrations of lersivirine or
etravirine. Consistent with the data presented above, the V108I
substitution was selected in the presence of lersivirine and was
associated with an approximately 5-fold-reduced susceptibility, whether
on a wt or K103N RT background (Table ​ (Table7). 7 ). Phenotypically,
the V108I mutant did not show cross-resistance to etravirine or
efavirenz, regardless of the background on which it was selected. In
viruses with a Y181C background, a V179V/D mutation in the RT gene was
selected both with and without V108I. These viruses show an 8-fold (for
the triple mutant) and 11-fold (for the double mutant) decrease in
susceptibility to lersivirine. The V179V/D mutation showed between a 7-
and 13-fold decrease in susceptibility to both etravirine and efavirenz,
respectively. Culture of the K103N virus in the presence of etravirine
selected a different set of substitutions in RT (L100I or M230M/I) (data
not shown), suggesting a unique genotypic resistance pattern for
lersivirine compared with that for either etravirine or efavirenz.

### TABLE 7.

Susceptibilities of lersivirine-resistant HIV-1 isolates to lersivirine,
efavirenz, and etravirine ^*a*^

Virus backbone ^*b*^

Experimental condition

RT mutation(s)

Fold change in EC ~50~ from that for wt virus of indicated drug ^*c*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lersivirine

EFV

ETV

wt

Virus after passage through lersivirine

V108I

5.5

1.5

0.9

K103N

Input virus

K103N

2.7

35.5

1.4

Virus after passage through lersivirine

K103N, V108V/I

5.0

54.8

1.1

Y181C

Input virus

Y181C

1.8

1.9

4.4

Virus after passage through lersivirine

Y181C, V179V/D

11.1

9.5

13.0

Virus after passage through lersivirine

Y181C, V108V/I, V179V/D

8.0

7.2

9.4

Open in a separate window

^a^ Mutations were identified in the GeneSeq HIV assay at Monogram
Biosciences. Susceptibilities to lersivirine, efavirenz (EFV), and
etravirine (ETV) were determined in Monogram Biosciences\'s PhenoSense
assay.

^b^ Serial passage of wt virus or K103N or Y181C site-directed mutants
in fixed concentrations of lersivirine. The wt and K103N and Y181C
mutant viruses were passaged at 17 days, 10 days, and 17 days,
respectively.

^c^ The drug-sensitive virus CNDO was used as the reference virus for
estimation of fold change in EC ~50~ in the PhenoSense assay; this value
was then used to determine the EC ~50~ fold change from that for the wt
virus.

### Lersivirine is additive or synergistic with other antiretroviral agents.

To establish the potential of lersivirine for administration in
combination with other antiretroviral agents, the *in vitro* antiviral
effect of the pair-wise combinations of lersivirine with class
representatives of currently approved and investigational anti-HIV
agents was assessed using MT-2 cells and measuring cell viability 5 days
after NL4-3 infection (Table ​ (Table8). 8 ). Combinations of lersivirine
with drugs of the NRTI class (abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine,
lamivudine, tenofovir, and zidovudine) resulted in synergistic
interactions. In addition, synergistic interactions were observed with
the integrase inhibitors elvitegravir and raltegravir and the fusion
inhibitor enfuvirtide. Lersivirine in combination with a PI generally
resulted in additive interactions (atazanavir, lopinavir, and
ritonavir). There was no evidence of antagonistic interactions with any
of the compounds investigated, and there was no evidence of synergistic
cytotoxicity at the highest concentrations tested (1 μM for
lersivirine).

### TABLE 8.

Synergy/additivity of lersivirine with agents from other antiretroviral
classes *in vitro* ^*a*^

Agent ( *n* )

Class

Mean vol ± SD (μM ^2^ %) of lersivirine:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Synergy

Antagonism

Combined effect

Abacavir (3)

NRTI

90.6 ± 26.5

−49.3 ± 84.2

Moderate synergy (minor antagonism)

Didanosine (4)

NRTI

156.0 ± 66.1

−3.7 ± 7.3

Strong synergy

Emtricitabine (4)

NRTI

140.5 ± 57.1

−5.1 ± 8.9

Strong synergy

Lamivudine (4)

NRTI

175.1 ± 81.1

−6.3 ± 12.1

Strong synergy

Tenofovir (3)

NRTI

115.6 ± 40.7

−10.8 ± 11.9

Strong synergy

Zidovudine (3)

NRTI

177.5 ± 183.8

−15.4 ± 26.7

Strong synergy ^*b*^

Atazanavir (2)

PI

6.6 ± 9.4

−23.1 ± 32.6

Additive

Lopinavir (2)

PI

29.1 ± 19.4

−28.5 ± 30.3

Minor synergy/minor antagonism ^*c*^

Ritonavir (2)

PI

12.6 ± 0.6

−19.1 ± 27.1

Additive

Elvitegravir (3)

INT

69.7 ± 66.5

−20.1 ± 34.8

Moderate synergy

Raltegravir (2)

INT

34.6 ± 13.8

−10.7 ± 15.1

Minor synergy

Enfuvirtide (3)

Entry

75.1 ± 77.8

−32.8 ± 56.8

Moderate synergy (minor antagonism)

Open in a separate window

^a^ Experiments performed using a cytopathic-effect-based assay with
HIV-1 NL4-3 in MT-2 cells. Volumes of synergy (μM ^2^ %) were calculated
at 95% confidence intervals using drug combination data from three to
four replicate plates per assay, with the aid of MacSynergy II software.
Volumes are expressed as means from two to four independent experiments
(± standard deviations \[SD\]). For these studies, synergy (assigned a
positive value) or antagonism (assigned a negative value) was defined as
drug combinations yielding mean volumes in excess of 25 μM ^2^ %.
Moderate synergistic/antagonistic activity and strong
synergistic/antagonistic activity were defined as mean volumes between
50 and 100 μM ^2^ % and in excess of 100 μM ^2^ %, respectively.
Additive drug interactions were defined by mean volumes of 0 to 25 μM
^2^ %. Elvitegravir is an investigational integrase inhibitor (INT).

^b^ Strong synergy seen in two experiments; additive interaction in the
third experiment.

^c^ Minor synergy/minor antagonism seen in one experiment; additive
interaction in the second experiment.



## DISCUSSION

Since the first agent, zidovudine, was licensed for the treatment of
HIV-1 infection in 1987, a total of 25 drugs have been approved for the
treatment of HIV ( 13 ). Since 1996, the importance of anti-HIV drug
combination regimens has become widely accepted, and in 2008, the
Department of Health and Human Services guidelines ( 46 ) recommend the
inclusion of at least two, and preferably three, fully active
antiretroviral agents when constructing drug regimens. Efavirenz-based
therapy or boosted PI-based therapies are currently recommended as
first-line regimens for the treatment of HIV infection. Although these
recommendations provide effective treatment options for the majority of
patients, treatment durability is still limited by drug-related side
effects, inadequate patient adherence, and the development of drug
resistance.

NNRTI-based regimens have been associated with a low genetic barrier to
resistance, rash, hypersensitivity reactions, and central nervous system
side effects. Etravirine, a novel NNRTI with activity against a broader
panel of NNRTI mutant viruses, has recently been approved for use in
treatment-experienced patients who have evidence of infection with HIV-1
strains that are resistant to an NNRTI and other antiretroviral agents
(Intelence prescribing information; Tibotec Therapeutics, Raritan, NJ).
However, rash and nausea are commonly reported adverse events in
etravirine-treated subjects. There is, therefore, still a need for
first-line antiviral agents that will facilitate patient adherence and
allow durable suppression of viral replication.

In our laboratories, we have recently identified a novel inhibitor of
HIV ( 11 ). In this paper, we confirm that lersivirine belongs to the
NNRTI class: *in vitro* , it inhibits the RT enzyme by a mixed
noncompetitive kinetic mechanism and binds the protein with a 1:1
stoichiometry in the NNRTI binding pocket. X-ray crystallography
suggests a novel binding mode of lersivirine into the "NNRTI pocket,"
which in turn translates to activity against key class resistance
mutants.

A survey of more than 5,000 patient samples of NNRTI-treated individuals
revealed that the most common mutations were K103N (29%), Y181C (14%),
and G190A (17%) ( 6 ). In agreement with this distribution, the most
commonly occurring NNRTI mutations found in our panels of 353 isolates
tested were K103N \> Y181C/I \> G190A/S. In this panel, lersivirine was
active against all clinically derived viruses that had no NNRTI
mutations, with many having phenotypic resistance to antiviral drugs of
the NRTI and PI classes (data not shown).

Furthermore, lersivirine also retained inhibitory activity against a
range of viruses carrying clinically relevant NNRTI mutations.
Lersivirine inhibited 62% of isolates containing a single NNRTI mutation
( *in vitro* resistance was defined using the BCO of 3.1) and was active
against the majority of viruses carrying the single mutations K103N,
Y181C, and G190A, which occur in the majority of patients failing NNRTI
therapy (Table ​ (Table6). 6 ). Although clinical studies have yet to
confirm this finding in patients, these initial results suggest that
lersivirine has the potential to be used in patients that failed a drug
regimen containing efavirenz, nevirapine, or delavirdine because of
mutations arising at location K103, Y181, or G190.

In our subtype study, one clade C virus (isolated in Puerto Rico)
demonstrated a 6.3-fold IC ~50~ to the reference virus strain.
Population sequence analysis did not reveal the presence of the V106M
mutation, which is often associated with resistance to efavirenz and NVP
in clade C viruses, or of any other NNRTI resistance-associated
mutations ( 21 ). However, a number of amino acid changes were present
in the RT gene from this patient virus, which may result in differences
in susceptibility but not necessarily resistance. These include amino
acids at positions 35, 135, 158, and 245 ( 9 ; J. Whitcomb, personal
communication). Slight decreases in susceptibility were also observed
when this isolate was tested against efavirenz and nevirapine (1.9- and
2.2-fold changes from those for the reference virus, respectively).

Sequential passage experiments with wt virus in the presence of
progressively increasing concentrations of drug *in vitro* can identify
the accumulation of mutations that confer resistance. Lersivirine dose
escalation studies identified two pathways to resistance; in both cases
V108I and F227L were selected, with resistance increased further as a
result of the emergence of E138K or M230M/I. The V108I mutation was also
selected in fixed-dose studies using the wt and viruses with preexisting
NNRTI-resistant mutations. Acquisition of a V108I mutation appears to be
the preferred molecular pathway to lersivirine resistance and differs
from that of efavirenz, etravirine, and rilpivirine. Two different
pathways to resistance were reported following dose escalation selection
experiments with WT virus for etravirine: V179F plus Y181C plus M230L
and Y181C plus G190E ( 49 ). In addition, the Y181C mutation was
selected in etravirine fixed-dose studies, suggesting the importance of
this mutation in the development of resistance to etravirine ( 49 ).

Several pathways were identified following escalating dose
concentrations of rilpivirine; combinations of the mutations L100I,
K101E, Y181C, and F227V were frequently seen with the laboratory strain
IIIB ( 4 ). The preferred molecular pathway to lersivirine resistance
would appear to differ from that of etravirine and rilpivirine. The most
common NNRTI resistance-associated substitutions (seen in at least 10%
of patients) that emerged in patients with virologic failure---who
received etravirine in the DUET-1 and -2 studies---included V108I,
V179F, V179I, and Y181C. These usually emerged in a background of other
NNRTI resistance-associated substitutions ( 20 , 43 ).

Interestingly, phenotypic data indicated that multiple mutations were
required to establish substantial resistance to lersivirine. In both
dose escalation and fixed-dose studies V108I was selected, suggesting
this variant to be the preferred molecular pathway under lersivirine
drug pressure. Phenotypically, the V108I mutant showed no
cross-resistance to efavirenz or etravirine. Similarly,
lersivirine-resistant viruses generated by dose escalation showed no
cross-resistance to efavirenz and DLV. These results suggest that
resistance was associated with, and specific for, the presence of
lersivirine and may not lead to class-wide resistance.

The question arises as to what makes lersivirine resilient against drug
resistance mutations. While it is difficult to unambiguously rationalize
the effect of mutations in the NNRTI binding pocket with changes in IC
~50~ , the three-dimensional structure that we describe allows us to
propose a hypothesis. As shown in Fig. ​ Fig.3C, 3C , lersivirine makes
extensive contacts through the 3,5-dicyanophenoxy group with Trp229 at
the top of the binding pocket. This residue not only is part of the
NNRTI binding pocket but also belongs to the "primer grip" of HIV RT,
and any mutation at this position has been shown to severely compromise
the RNA- and DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activities of the enzyme ( 33
). Indeed, this immutable residue has become the focus of the
development of novel NNRTIs ( 17 ). In addition, upon the binding of
many NNRTIs, the side chain of Tyr181, contained within the β4-β7-β8
sheet, have been reported to flip conformation from a "down" to an "up"
position ( 38 ). Upon the binding of lersivirine into the NNRTI binding
pocket, the Tyr181 is in the less frequently observed "down"
conformation. This tyrosine does not make the equivalent contacts with
the disubstituted group that is observed with other NNRTIs, such as
capravirine ( 37 ). The resilience of lersivirine to the Y181C mutation
can be explained by a reduction in the aromatic stacking interactions
with these residues. A recently reported benzophenone NNRTI series also
takes advantage of this alternative Y181 conformation ( 35 ).

Finally, we also observed that specific polar interactions between RT
and lersivirine are limited to the hydrogen bonds formed to the backbone
amides of the protein. We found that lersivirine accepts a hydrogen bond
from the Lys103 amide and donates a hydrogen bond to the Pro236
carbonyl. No specific interaction is made with the 103 side chain, and
no significant change in compound binding to the mutant enzyme is
observed. In short, lersivirine is an expression of a minimal NNRTI
pharmacophore in which maximum advantage is taken of the regions of the
binding sites that are constant while minimizing contacts with regions
of the site that are known to mutate. This strategy differs from that
adopted for higher-molecular-weight NNRTIs, such as etravirine, where
mutations are compensated for by a larger contact area. The
susceptibility of lersivirine to the V108I mutant (a 5-fold decrease in
potency) can be rationalized as this residue makes extensive van der
Waals contact with the dicyano-substituted phenol ring (4.0-Å contact
distance to the ring). A sterically more demanding isoleucine at this
position could perturb the binding mode observed.

Taking these data into consideration, lersivirine should be a potent
agent active against key clinical mutant HIV-1 strains. Indeed, when the
EC ~50~ for lersivirine is compared to the steady-state pharmacokinetics
of lersivirine in HIV-1-infected patients receiving the compound as
monotherapy at 500 mg once a day (QD) or 750 mg QD, there is a 50- and
93-fold window, respectively, between the protein-adjusted wt geometric
mean inhibition *in vitro* and the average free drug levels achieved
(Fig. ​ (Fig.5) 5 ) ( 15 , 16 ). Interestingly, at these doses, the
average free concentrations of lersivirine would be expected to be well
above the EC ~50~ for most mutants studied.

FIG. 5.

Comparison of the free steady-state average concentrations ( *C* ~avg~ )
in the monotherapies with 500 mg QD (A) and 750 mg QD (B) in HIV
patients and activity of lersivirine (EC ~50~ potency) against wt and
mutant NL4-3 viruses (Fig. ​ (Fig.4B). 4B ). Target-free plasma *C* ~avg~
is calculated using the area under the concentration-time curve from 0
to 24 h (AUC ~0-24~ ) on day 8 \[AUC ~tau~ = 3,543.5 ng·h/ml for the 500
mg QD (147.6 ng/ml; *n* = 6) (A) and AUC ~tau~ = 6,530.1 ng·h/ml for the
750 mg QD (272.1 ng/ml; *n* = 6) (B)\] and takes into account plasma
protein binding (∼60%) and the molecular weight of lersivirine (310.4).
The fold changes ( *C* ~avg~ /EC ~50~ ) for the wt and K103N and Y181C
mutants are shown by arrows.

To support the use of lersivirine as part of a multidrug regimen, the
antiviral activity of lersivirine was evaluated in combination with
representatives from each of the licensed antiretroviral classes *in
vitro* . Preliminary data indicate additive antiviral interactions with
all compounds in combination with lersivirine (with the exception of the
NRTIs, which frequently demonstrated synergistic interactions). Synergy
has previously been reported between NRTIs and NNRTIs which target the
same viral enzyme. Zidovudine and efavirenz were shown to be synergistic
in cell culture, and studies of etravirine combined with zidovudine
suggested synergy, though additive effects were reported when etravirine
was combined with other NRTI drugs (abacavir, didanosine, lamivudine,
stavudine, zalcitabine, zidovudine, and tenofovir) and representatives
of the PIs and the currently marketed NNRTIs ( 2 , 26 ). The synergistic
interaction between NRTIs and NNRTIs has been associated with the
ability of the NNRTI to inhibit ATP-mediated removal of the NRTI and so
prolong its MOA ( 7 ). The synergistic behavior of NRTIs and NNRTIs in
combination *in vitro* may contribute to their effectiveness *in vivo* .

There was no evidence of antagonistic interactions with any of the
compounds investigated, and there was no evidence of synergistic
cytotoxicity at the highest concentrations tested.

In conclusion, lersivirine represents an attractive novel NNRTI with
potency against an interesting panel of key clinical NNRTI mutant HIV-1
viruses. Ongoing clinical trials ( 15 ) are investigating its potential
for treatment of HIV-1-infected patients in the context of HAART.



## Supplementary Material

**\[Supplemental material\]**

Click here to view.



## Acknowledgments

R. Corbau, J. Mori, C. Phillips, L. Fishburn, A. Martin, C. Mowbray, W.
Panton, C. Smith-Burchnell, A. Thornberry, H. Ringrose, T. Knöchel, S.
Irving, M. Westby, A. Wood, and M. Perros are current or former
employees of Pfizer Global Research and Development.

The support provided by Iain Nicholson at Complete Medical
Communications funded by Pfizer Inc. consisted solely of manuscript
editing and formatting, and no contribution was made to editorial
content.



## Footnotes

^▿^ Published ahead of print on 26 July 2010.

^‡^ Supplemental material for this article may be found at
http://aac.asm.org/ .

