# Analysis of Drug Resistance in Children Receiving Antiretroviral Therapy for Treatment of HIV-1 Infection in Uganda

William I. Towler , ^1^ Linda Barlow-Mosha , ^2^ Jessica D. Church , ^1^
Danstan Bagenda , ^2,,^ ^3^ Patrick Ajuna , ^2^ Micheal Mubiru , ^2^
Philippa Musoke , ^2,,^ ^4^ and Susan H. Eshleman

^1^

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer



## Abstract

We analyzed drug resistance in HIV-infected Ugandan children who
received antiretroviral therapy in a prospective, observational study
(2004--2006); some children had prior single-dose nevirapine (sdNVP)
exposure. Children received stavudine (d4T), lamivudine (3TC), and
nevirapine (NVP); treatment was continued if they were clinically and
immunologically stable. Samples with \>1,000 copies/ml HIV RNA were
analyzed by using the ViroSeq HIV Genotyping System (ViroSeq). Subtype A
and D pretreatment samples also were analyzed with the LigAmp assay (for
K103N, Y181C, and G190A). ViroSeq results were obtained for 74
pretreatment samples (35 from sdNVP-exposed children (median age, 19
months) and 39 from sdNVP-unexposed children (median age, 84 months).
This included 39 subtype A, 22 subtype D, 1 subtype C, and 12
inter-subtype recombinant samples. One sample had nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) resistance, one had nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) resistance, and three had protease
inhibitor (PI) resistance. Y181C was detected by using LigAmp in five
pretreatment samples \[four (14.8%) of 37 samples from sdNVP-exposed
children, one (4.2%) of 24 samples from children without prior sdNVP
exposure; *p* = 0.35\]. Among children who were not virally suppressed
at 48 weeks of treatment, all 12 tested had NNRTI resistance, as well as
resistance to 3TC and emtricitibine (FTC); three had resistance to other
NRTIs. Seven of those children had a ViroSeq result at 96 weeks of
treatment; four of the seven acquired resistance to additional NRTIs by
96 weeks. In Uganda, clinically and immunologically stable children
receiving nonsuppressive antiretroviral treatment regimens are at risk
for development of drug resistance.



## Introduction

A ccess to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for people
living with HIV/AIDS in Africa has increased significantly over the last
5 years. However, implementation of antiretroviral treatment programs
for children has lagged behind that for adults. More than 2 million
children are estimated to be living with HIV infection, most (∼90%) in
sub-Sarahan Africa.

In 2006, almost 800,000 children were considered eligible for HAART;
however, only ∼5% of those were receiving antiretroviral treatment. ^1^
Challenges of providing antiretroviral therapy for children in
sub-Saharan Africa include the following: limited pediatric drug
formulations and treatment options, inadequate numbers of well-trained
staff, the complexity of pediatric antiretroviral treatment, the cost
and complexity of laboratory assays needed for diagnosis before 18
months of age, and the need for a caretaker to ensure adherence to the
treatment regimen. ^2^

Most cases of pediatric HIV infection result from mother-to-child
transmission of HIV (MTCT). In sub-Saharan Africa, the most widely used
antiretroviral drug regimen for prevention of MTCT single-dose
nevirapine (sdNVP). ^3^ NVP-resistant HIV variants are selected in many
infants who are HIV-infected despite sdNVP prophylaxis. ^4^ These
variants usually fade from detection in infants over time, but are still
detectable in some infants more than a year after sdNVP exposure.
^5\ ,\ 6^ Prior sdNVP exposure can compromise subsequent antiretroviral
therapy in children. ^7^ In 2001, results from the PACTG 377 trial
demonstrated that continuing treatment of HIV-infected children with an
antiretroviral regimen after virologic failure is associated with
accumulation of additional resistance mutations. ^8^ In resource-limited
settings, where children receiving HAART often do not have access to
viral load monitoring, children may be maintained on nonsuppressive
regimens, increasing the likelihood that resistance will develop.

In this study, we analyzed antiretroviral drug resistance in children
who received HAART in a prospective, observational study, "A study of
the effectiveness of generic highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) for the treatment of HIV infected Ugandan children." ^9\ ,\ 10^



## Methods

### Source of samples

Samples were obtained from HIV-infected children who received HAART in
the Makerere University--Johns Hopkins University (MU-JHU) Research
Clinic, in Kampala, Uganda. Ninety-two children were enrolled in the
study from 2004 to 2006; 44 of the children had been exposed to sdNVP
for prevention of MTCT. None of the children had received HAART before
study enrollment, and all of the children met the 2003 World Health
Organization (WHO) criteria for antiretroviral therapy in
resource-limited settings. The children received a combination of
stavudine (d4T), lamivudine (3TC), and nevirapine (NVP). Children
weighing \<9 kg were initiated on syrup formulations of d4T, 3TC, and
NVP; children weighing \>9 kg received a fixed-dose formulation of the
same three drugs (Triomune tablets, CIPLA, India).

Children were followed up for ≥48 weeks of treatment. Adherence
counseling was provided to caregivers throughout the study; adherence
was monitored by using pill counts and reports from caregivers. Clinical
data were collected, and CD4 cell count and HIV viral load were measured
before HAART initiation, and at 12, 24, 36, 48, 72, and 96 weeks of
therapy. Plasma samples were stored for HIV-resistance testing. Therapy
was considered to have failed if there was inadequate weight gain,
increasing WHO clinical staging, or a \>30% decline in CD4 count/percent
\>12 weeks after the start of therapy. Detection of HIV RNA did not lead
to a change of therapy if the child was clinically stable and the CD4
cell count was not declining. In this substudy, children were
categorized as virally suppressed if their viral load was \<1,000
copies/ml throughout the study period, and they were categorized as
nonsuppressed if they had \>1,000 copies/ml at any study visit. This
cut-off value was selected because the volume of plasma available for
genotyping was low (0.25 ml per sample); with only 0.25 ml plasma for
testing, a viral load of ≥1,000 copies/ml is needed for amplification in
the genotyping assay. Three children were changed to a different
antiretroviral regimen because of adverse reactions, all within 2 weeks
of starting therapy. Two of the three children had baseline samples and
were included in the analysis of baseline resistance; however, these two
children were not included in the analysis of resistance at 48 or 96
weeks and were excluded from the analysis of viral suppression. The
majority of children had a significant decline in HIV RNA after HAART
initiation, and the response to antiretroviral therapy was similar among
children with and without prior sdNVP exposure. ^9^

### Laboratory methods

Methods used for analysis of HIV RNA, HIV DNA (for HIV diagnosis in
infants), and CD4 cell counts were described in a previous report. ^11^
The ViroSeq HIV Genotyping System v2.7 (Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA)
was used for HIV genotyping, by using 0.25 ml plasma samples with at
least 1,000 copies/ml HIV RNA. Bidirectional sequence data were obtained
for HIV reverse transcriptase (amino acids 41--335) for 88 (93.6%) of 94
samples with resistance test results (74 pretreatment samples and 20
follow-up samples). HIV subtypes were determined by phylogenetic
analysis of *pol* region sequences. ^12^ Phylogenetic analysis confirmed
that the sequences from each child were grouped together, with no
evidence of sample mix-up or cross-contamination (not shown). For
subtype A and D HIV variants, NVP resistance mutations (K103N=AAC, 0.5%
assay cutoff; Y181C=TGT, 1% assay cutoff; G190A=GCA, 0.5% assay cutoff )
were detected and quantified by using the LigAmp assay, as described.
^13^

### Statistical methods

Statistical analysis consisted of computation of medians and
proportions. Owing to the small sample size, statistical significance
for comparison of proportions and medians was tested by using Fisher\'s
Exact test and the Wilcoxon test, respectively. All statistical tests
were done by using the R Software, ^14^ against a two-sided 0.05 alpha
significance level.

### Informed consent

Guidelines of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the
authors\' institutions were followed in the conduct of this research.
Informed consent was obtained from the mothers of children enrolled in
the observational study; the study was approved by Makerere University
Faculty of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee in Uganda.

### GenBank submission

HIV sequences obtained in this study were submitted to GenBank
\[Accession numbers: HM037809-HM037882 (baseline), HM037883-HM037894 (48
weeks), and HM037895-HM037902 (96 weeks)\].



## Results

### Analysis of pretreatment samples

Samples collected before HAART initiation (pretreatment samples) were
available for 83 (90.2%) of the 92 children. HIV genotyping results were
obtained by using the ViroSeq system for 74 (89.2%) of the 83 samples
(HIV subtypes: 39 subtype A, 22 subtype D, one subtype C, and 12
inter-subtype recombinant). The 74 children with results included 35
children with a history of sdNVP exposure (median age, 19 months; range,
7--75 months) and 39 children without prior sdNVP exposure (median age,
84 months; range, 24--148 months). No significant differences were found
in demographic or laboratory variables for children with *versus*
without pretreatment ViroSeq test results ( Table 1 ).

### Table 1.

Characteristics of Study Subjects with Versus Without a Pretreatment
ViroSeq Test Result

*Total*

*No ViroSeq result*

*ViroSeq result obtained*

p *Value*

No. of subjects

92

18 ^a^

74

Median age at baseline (mo)

51.5

47.0

51.5

0.66 ^b^

Male gender (%)

53.9

58.9

52.8

0.78 ^c^

Median CD4 cell count (cells/mm ^3^ )

506.0

592.5

492.0

0.35 ^b^

Median log ~10~ viral load (copies/ml)

5.6

5.3

5.6

0.55 ^b^

Prior sdNVP exposure (%)

47.8

50.0

47.3

1.00 ^c^

Open in a separate window

^a^ Nine children did not have a pretreatment sample; samples from nine
children failed genotyping.

^b^ Wilcoxon rank-sum test.

^c^ Fisher\'s Exact test.

Antiretroviral drug resistance mutations were detected in pretreatment
samples from two (2.7%) of the 74 children ( Table 2 ); both children
were 1 year old and had a history of prior sdNVP exposure. One child had
resistance to nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), with
possible resistance to zidovudine (ZDV) and stavudine (d4T), reflecting
the presence of the T215A mutation; that child was virologically
suppressed throughout the study period (followed up to week 48). The
other child had resistance to nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NNRTIs), with resistance to NVP and delavirdine (DLV), and
possible resistance to efavirenz (EFV), reflecting the presence of the
Y181C mutation; that child had \>1,000 copies/ml of HIV RNA at the 12-,
24-, 36-, and 48-week study visits (followed up to week 48). HIV from
all 74 children had polymorphisms in HIV protease that are associated
with reduced susceptibility to protease inhibitors (PIs, *e.g* ., M36I,
K20R). However, only three samples had genotypes with predicted PI
resistance. In all three cases, the samples had possible resistance to
tripranavir (TPV); all three samples had I13V, M36I, K45R, and H69K; one
sample also had L10I, and two samples also had K20R.

### Table 2.

Detection of NRTI and NNRTI Resistance before HAART Initiation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*ViroSeq*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*LigAmp (subtype A and D only)*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Virally suppressed* ^a^

*sdNVP exposed*

*No. tested*

*No. results*

*No. (%) with resistance*

*No. tested*

*No. (%) with resistance*

Yes

No

29

25

0

16

1 ^d^

Yes

27

24

1 ^b^

20

1 ^e^

Total

56

49

1 (2.0%)

36

2 (5.6%)

No

No

16

14

0

8

0

Yes

11

11

1 ^c^

7

3 ^c,f,g^

Total

27

25

1 (4.0%)

15

3 (20.0%)

Overall

83

74

2 (2.7%)

51

5 (9.8%)

Open in a separate window

Pretreatment samples were analyzed with the ViroSeq HIV Genotyping
System for detection of mutations in HIV protease and reverse
transcriptase. Fifty-one of the 61 samples with subtype A or D HIV were
also tested with the LigAmp assay for detection of selected
NVP-resistance mutations (K103N, Y181C, and G190A); 10 subtype A or D
samples had insufficient DNA remaining after genotyping for analysis
with the LigAmp assay. The table shows the number of samples tested with
each assay (no. tested), the number of samples with results with ViroSeq
(no. with results), and the number of samples with resistance mutations
detected by using each assay (no. with resistance). For children who had
one or more resistance mutations detected in the pretreatment sample,
the age of the child, HIV subtype, mutation(s) detected, and level of
mutation detected (for LigAmp) are detailed in the footnotes.

^a^ Children were characterized as virally suppressed if their viral
load was \<1,000 copies/ml throughout the study period.

^b^ One-year-old child with subtype D HIV; T215A detected by ViroSeq.

^c^ One-year-old child with subtype A HIV; Y181C detected by ViroSeq and
LigAmp (at 1.4%).

^d^ Five-year-old child with subtype D HIV; Y181C detected by LigAmp (at
2.6%).

^e^ This child was 1.4 years old with subtype D HIV; Y181C detected by
LigAmp (at 5.2%).

^f^ This child was 1.4 years old with A/F recombinant HIV; Y181C
detected by LigAmp (at 2.3%).

^g^ Six-month-old child with subtype D HIV; Y181C detected by LigAmp (at
3.9%).

For 51 of the 61 children with subtype A or D HIV infection, sufficient
DNA remained after genotyping to permit analysis with a sensitive
point-mutation assay, LigAmp. This assay was used to detect and quantify
NVP resistance mutations K103N, Y181C, and G190A. None of the 51 samples
had K103N or G190A detected. However, five (9.8%) of 51 samples had
Y181C detected at low levels ( Table 2 ). The proportion of children who
had Y181C detected before HAART initiation was higher among children
with prior sdNVP exposure \[four (14.8%) of 27\] than among children
without sdNVP exposure \[one (4.2%) of 24\], but this difference was not
statistically significant ( *p* = 0.35). The four sdNVP-exposed children
who had Y181C detected initiated HAART at 6, 12, 16, and 16 months of
age; the one child without prior sdNVP exposure who had Y181C detected
initiated HAART at 5 years, 4 months of age. Three (20%) of 15 children
who were not virally suppressed on HAART had Y181C detected before
treatment, compared with only two (5.6%) of 36 children who were virally
suppressed on HAART ( *p* = 0.14).

### Analysis of samples from children on HAART

Fifteen (20.3%) of the 74 of the children who had a pretreatment ViroSeq
result had detectable HIV RNA at week 48; 14 of those children had a
48-week sample, and results were obtained for 12 (85.7%) of the 14
samples ( Table 3 ). All 12 samples had resistance to the NRTIs, 3TC and
emtricitibine (FTC), reflecting the presence of the M184V mutation.
Three samples had resistance to other NRTIs. One sample had resistance
to tenofovir (TDF) with possible resistance to abacavir (ABC) and
didanosine (ddI), reflecting the presence of the K65R mutation. One
sample had possible resistance to ddI, possibly related to the D67G and
T69N mutations. One sample had possible resistance to ZDV, d4T, and ABC,
reflecting the presence of mutations at codon 215 (T251S/Y).

### Table 3.

Detection of NRTI and NNRTI Resistance after 48 or 96 Weeks on HAART in
Children Who Were Not Virally Suppressed

*Study subject*

*sdNVP*

*Visit*

*NRTI mutations*

*NRTI resistance*

*NNRTI mutations*

*NNRTI resistance*

1

48

M184V+E44D+T69N+V118I

3TC, FTC

K103N+V108I

DLV, NVP, EFV

2

Yes

48

M184V+T69N+K70R

3TC, FTC

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

3

Yes

48

M184V

3TC, FTC

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

4

Yes

48

M184V+T69N+V75I

3TC, FTC

V108I+Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

5

Yes

48

M184V

3TC, FTC

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

6

48

M184V+ *K65R*

3TC, FTC, *TDF, (ABC), (ddI)*

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

96

M184V+ **A62V**

3TC, FTC

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

7

48

M184V+V75I

3TC, FTC

G190A

NVP, (EFV)

96

M184V+V75I+ **T215F/I/S**

3TC, FTC, **(ZDV), (d4T), (ABC)**

G190A

NVP, (EFV)

8

48

M184V

3TC, FTC

*K103N* +G190A

DLV, NVP, EFV

96

M184V

3TC, FTC

**K103S** +G190A

DLV, NVP, EFV

9

48

M184V

3TC, FTC

A98G+ *Y181C* +G190A

DLV, NVP, EFV

96

M184V+ **D67N** + **K70R** + **K219Q**

3TC, FTC, **(AZT), (d4T)**

A98G+G190A

NVP **, (EFV)**

10

48

M184V+ *V75I*

3TC, FTC

G190A

NVP, (EFV)

96

M184V

3TC, FTC

G190A

NVP, (EFV)

11

48

M184V+D67G+T69N

3TC, FTC, (ddI)

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

96

M184V+ **M41L** +D67G+T69N+ **V118I** + **T215F**

3TC, FTC, **ddI** , **d4T** , **ZDV** , **(ABC)**

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

12

Yes

48

M184V+T215S/Y

3TC, FTC, (ZDV), (d4T), (ABC)

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

96

M184V+ **M41L** + **L210W** +T215Y

3TC, FTC, **ZDV, d4T, ABC, (ddI)** , **(TDF)**

Y181C

DLV, NVP, (EFV)

Open in a separate window

Samples collected from children at 48- and 96-week study visits (48 and
96 weeks on antiretroviral therapy) were analyzed with the ViroSeq
system. Five children had a history of single-dose nevirapine exposure
(sdNVP, Yes). The table shows the mutations associated with resistance
to nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and nonnucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs). Mutations shown in italics
were detected only at 48 weeks; mutations shown in bold were detected
only at 96 weeks. The ViroSeq interpretations of NRTI and NNRTI drug
susceptibility are also shown for each sample. Parentheses indicate a
prediction of possible resistance; italics indicate that resistance or
possible resistance was detected at 48 weeks only; bold indicates that
resistance or possible resistance was detected at 96 weeks only.
Antiretroviral drugs are abbreviated as follows: 3TC, lamivudine; FTC,
emtricitabine; ZDV, zidovudine; ddI, didanosine; d4T, stavudine; ABC,
abacavir; TDF, tenofovir, DLV, delavirdine; EFV, efavirenz; NVP,
nevirapine.

All 12 samples also had resistance to NNRTIs, including resistance to
NVP ( *n* = 12), DLV ( *n* = 10), and (EFV, *n* = 2; Table 3 ). The most
common NNRTI mutation detected was Y181C, which was detected in eight
(66.7%) of the 12 samples; one sample also had V108I. The eight samples
with Y181C included the 48-week sample from the child who had Y181C
detected by ViroSeq and LigAmp before treatment, and the 48-week sample
from one of the four children who had Y181C detected by LigAmp only
before treatment. The other five samples were from children who did not
have Y181C detected before HAART initiation. Different patterns of NNRTI
mutations were detected at 48 weeks in children with *versus* without
prior sdNVP exposure ( Table 3 ). All five samples from children with
prior sdNVP exposure had Y181C; one sample also had V108I. In contrast,
samples from seven children without prior sdNVP exposure had up to three
NVP resistance mutations detected (mean, 1.6 mutations), four with
G190A, three with Y181C, two with K103N, one with V108I, and one with
A98G ( Table 3 ). All 12 of the 48-week samples had at least one
mutation associated with reduced PI susceptibility; however, only one
had a genotype predictive of PI resistance (possible resistance to TPV,
reflecting the presence of L10V, in addition to M36I, K45R, and H69K);
this child had the same protease genotype before treatment. Two other
children with possible TPV resistance at baseline did not have a 48-week
sample for analysis.

Seven of the 12 children had \>1,000 c/ml HIV RNA at the 96-week visit,
and had a 96-week sample available for analysis (one child died after
the 48-week visit, and four children were followed up for 48 weeks
only). In four of the seven samples, additional mutations were detected
at 96 weeks, with new or increased resistance to NRTIs ( Table 3 ). One
child acquired new possible resistance to ZDV, d4T, and ABC; one
acquired new resistance to ddI, d4T, and ZDV with new possible
resistance to ABC; one acquired new possible resistance to ZDV and d4T;
and one acquired new resistance to ZDV, d4T, and ABC, with new possible
resistance to ddI and TDF. No major differences in NNRTI resistance were
found between the 48- and 96-week visits, with one exception: in one
child, the 48-week sample had evidence of resistance to all three NNRTIs
(A98G, Y181C, and G190A were detected), but the 96-week sample only had
evidence for resistance to NVP and possible resistance to EFV (A98G and
G190A were detected without Y181C).

Four children were virally suppressed through week 48, but had
\>1,000 c/ml HIV RNA at 96 weeks; three of those children also had
\>1,000 c/ml HIV RNA at week 72. All four children had 96-week samples
available for testing; however, three of those samples failed to amplify
in the ViroSeq assay. In the remaining child, the 96-week sample had
evidence of 3TC and FTC resistance (with M184V detected), as well as
evidence of NVP resistance with possible EFV resistance (with G190A
detected). Before HAART initiation, that child had no evidence of NRTI
or NNRTI resistance.



## Discussion

Several other studies have evaluated antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected African children on HAART. ^15\ --\ 18^ Those studies
include children on a variety of antiretroviral regimens ( *e.g* ., two
NRTIs with either one PI or one NNRTI). Because of the differences in
design among the studies, it is difficult to compare the risk of
resistance in the different cohorts. In general, NRTI and NNRTI
resistance were commonly detected among children with suboptimal viral
suppression.

By using the ViroSeq system, we detected NVP resistance before treatment
in only one of 74 children, 35 of whom had a history of prior sdNVP
exposure. That child did not achieve viral suppression on the
NVP-containing treatment regimen. With the LigAmp assay, we detected
Y181C in five children, one of whom did not have a history of prior
sdNVP exposure; we do not know if detection of Y181C in that child
reflects an inaccurate NVP exposure history, or natural occurrence of
Y181C as a minority variant in the viral population. Our validation
studies of the LigAmp assay included comparison of LigAmp results with
other methods for minority variants analysis, including phenotypic
selection in a yeast system, ^19^ allele-specific PCR (ASPCR), ^20^ and
characterization of cloned variants. We have not detected false-positive
results with LigAmp. In contrast to LigAmp, false-positive results are
not uncommon with ASPCR. False-positive results in ASPCR usually reflect
mismatches at binding sites in the control (nonmutant) reaction; this
leads to an underestimation of wild-type HIV, with a consequent
overestimation of mutant HIV. A major difference between LigAmp and
ASPCR is that in LigAmp, mutant DNA is directly quantified in a fixed
amount of amplified DNA. Mutant data are not normalized to wild-type
data, as in ASPCR. In LigAmp, mismatches at oligonucleotide-binding
sites can lead to underestimation of mutant DNA, but do not lead to
false-positive results. ^20^ For these reasons, although we cannot rule
out the possibility of a false-positive result, we believe that this is
unlikely to be the explanation for mutation detection in these children.
A trend was noted toward detection of Y181C before treatment in children
who did not achieve viral suppression on HAART, but the association was
not statistically significant.

In our cohort, all 12 of the children who had a viral load \>1,000
copies/ml at 48 weeks and had a genotyping result had both NNRTI and
NRTI resistance. Continuing treatment for an additional 48 weeks (to
week 96) led to enhanced resistance to NRTIs, reflecting selection of
HIV with thymidine analogue mutations. With this combination of NNRTI
and NRTI resistance, children remain susceptible to only the protease
inhibitors in the currently recommended second-line regimen for children
(ABC+ddI+lopinavir/ritonavir). In this cohort, immunologic and virologic
treatment responses were similar in sdNVP-exposed *versus*
sdNVP-unexposed children. ^10^ In this study, children who were not
virally suppressed developed NNRTI resistance, regardless of prior sdNVP
exposure.

These findings demonstrate that resistance emerges frequently in
children receiving HAART who are not virally suppressed, even if they
are clinically and immunologically stable. Use of viral load monitoring
should be considered if feasible to reduce the emergence of multidrug
resistance in children undergoing antiretroviral treatment. This is
particularly important in resource-limited settings where the pediatric
formulations of antiretroviral drugs are limited.



## Acknowledgments

We thank the caregivers and infants who participated in the
observational study and the study staff in Uganda for providing samples
and data for this project.

This work was supported by (a) the HIV Prevention Trials Network (HPTN)
sponsored by the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID), National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development
(NICH/HD), National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institute of
Mental Health, and Office of AIDS Research, of the NIH, DHHS
(U01-AI068613), (b) the International Maternal Pediatric and Adolescent
AIDS Clinical Trials Group, NIAID, NICHD, NIH (U01-AI-068632), and (c)
the International Leadership Award, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS
Foundation.



## Author Disclosure Statement

None of the authors has a commercial or other association that might
pose a conflict of interest, with the following exception: Dr. Susan
Eshleman is a co-inventor of the LigAmp assay, and Johns Hopkins
University has filed a patent application with the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office. The inventors may receive royalty payments if the
patent is awarded and licensed.

