# nViremia and drug resistance among HIV-1 patients on antiretroviral treatment -- a cross-sectional study in Soweto, South Africa

Ziad El-Khatib , BSc, MSc, ^1,^ ^2,^ ^\*^ Anna Mia Ekström , MD, MPH,
PhD, ^1^ Johanna Ledwaba , BSc, MSc, ^2^ Lerato Mohapi , MBBCh, ^3^
Fatima Laher , MBBCh, ^3^ Alan Karstaedt , MBBCh, ^4^ Salome
Charalambous , MBBCh, MSc, ^5^ Max Petzold , PhD, ^1,^ ^6^ David
Katzenstein , MD, ^7^ and Lynn Morris , DPhil ^2^

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer

The publisher\'s final edited version of this article is available at
AIDS



## Abstract

### Background:

We assessed risk factors for viremia and drug resistance (DR) among
long-term recipients of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in South Africa.

### Methods:

In 2008, we conducted a cross-sectional study among patients receiving
ART for ≥12 months. Genotypic resistance testing was performed on
individuals with a viral load \>400 RNA copies/ml. Multiple logistic
regression analysis was used to assess associations.

### Results:

Of 998 subjects, 75% were women with a median age of 41. Most (64%) had
been on treatment for \>3 years. The prevalence of viremia was 14%
(n=139); 12% (102/883) on first-line (i.e. NNRTI based regimen) and 33%
(37/115) on second-line (i.e. PI based regimen) ART. Of viremic
patients, 78% had DR mutations. For NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs the prevalence
of mutations was 64%, 81% and 2% among first-line and 29%, 54% and 6%
among second-line failures respectively. M184V/I, K103N and V106A/M were
the most common mutations.

Significant risk factors associated with viremia on first-line included
concurrent tuberculosis treatment (OR 6.4, 2.2-18.8, p\<0.01) and a
recent history of poor adherence (OR 2.7, 1.3-5.6, p=0.01). Among
second-line failures, attending a public clinic (OR 4.6, 1.8-11.3,
p\<0.01) and not having a refrigerator at home (OR 6.7, 1.2-37.5,
p=0.03) were risk factors for virological failure.

### Conclusions:

Risk factors for viral failure were line-regimen dependent. Second-line
ART recipients had a higher rate of viremia, albeit with infrequent PI
DR mutations. Measures to maintain effective virologic suppression
should include increased adherence counseling, attention to concomitant
tuberculosis treatment and heat-stable formulations of second-line ART
regimens.

**Keywords:** Antiretroviral therapy, HIV, adherence, HIV drug
resistance, South Africa, Viral failure



## BACKGROUND

In South Africa, of the approximately 6 million HIV-1 infected
individuals, more than 600,000 were enrolled into antiretroviral
treatment (ART) programs by mid 2009 \[ 1 \]. The majority of patients
receive a first-line regimen that includes two nucleoside
reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and one non-NRTI (NNRTI). The
NRTI drug, stavudine is routinely used although many patients show
intolerability \[ 2 \]. It is estimated that less than 10% of patients
are on a second-line regimen that includes two NRTIs combined with one
boosted protease inhibitor (PI) as recommend by the World Health
Organization (WHO) \[ 3 , 4 \]. While ART delays disease progression and
premature death, sustained high adherence to ART is necessary to prolong
viral suppression \[ 5 , 6 \]. There are important consequences to
viremia on first-line ART including the development of drug resistance
mutations and the need to switch to a second-line regimen with
considerable cost implications \[ 7 , 8 \].

Although high levels of adherence to ART have been reported from
small-scale HIV programs in sub-Saharan Africa \[ 9 , 10 \], challenges
arise as programs are taken to scale by governments in countries with a
growing burden of HIV and tuberculosis (TB), limited health-care systems
and drug supplies \[ 11 , 12 \]. Many studies in southern Africa have
examined virologic failure in different populations and shown that a
number of factors influence viremia among first-line patients \[ 13 , 14
\]. These include the HIV care setting, payment for ART, the distance
traveled from home to clinic and adherence to appointments and
medication among others. Some studies have also examined drug resistance
(DR) among selected patients with virological failure and shown that the
majority harbor mutations associated with lamivudine, NNRTIs and
thymidine analogue mutations (TAMs) \[ 13 , 15 - 18 \]. Here, we aimed
to determine the relationship between prevalence of viremia, DR and
reported adherence among \~1,000 long-term recipients of ART, including
a proportion on 2 ^nd^ line regimens, in Soweto, South Africa.



## METHODS

### Study setting

We conducted a cross-sectional study at two outpatient clinics at the
Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital, the largest hospital in Africa, located
in Soweto outside Johannesburg serving a population of 4 million people
\[ 19 , 20 \]. Both clinics are affiliated to the Faculty of Health
Sciences at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and had
access to ART through clinical research trials before the National ART
scale-up in 2004. The first clinic is a non-governmental organization
(NGO) research clinic \[ 21 \] with five medical doctors, three nurses,
two nursing assistants and two counselors managing an estimated 50 HIV
patients per day of the approximately 1,500 on ART (i.e. around 300
patients for each medical doctor). The second clinic is a public clinic
with eight medical doctors, four nurses, one nursing assistant and seven
counselors managing an estimated 200 HIV patient visits per day from
approximately 3,500 on ART (i.e. around 440 patients for each medical
doctor). The study was approved by the research ethics committees at the
University of the Witwatersrand and the Regional Medical Ethics Board in
Stockholm, Sweden. Written informed consent for conducting an interview
and taking a blood sample was obtained from all patients.

### Patient recruitment and interview

During March-September 2008, we recruited patients through posters in
the clinic and pharmacy waiting areas in the three most widely spoken
languages in Soweto: English, seSotho and isiZulu. Patients interested
in the study were provided an information sheet, which included a 50
South African Rands (\$5 US) as a transport reimbursement.

The following inclusion criteria were applied: 1) ≥18 years old; 2)
being on ART ≥12 months; and 3) consenting to participate in the study.
We initially enrolled 1,000 patients (500 at each site) but after
discovering that two patients were interviewed twice at the public
clinic the final number was 998 unique individuals.

The interview questionnaire was developed in English, translated into
isiZulu and seSotho then back-translated to English. After piloting, the
final questionnaire included 59 questions with a total of 210 items
covering socio-economic background, disclosure, TB treatment, ART
side-effects and adherence during the previous week-end \[ 22 \] which
served as a proxy for recent adherence. Two research assistants, trained
in nursing and public health and fluent in all three languages,
interviewed patients which took on average 15 minutes. The questionnaire
data was entered into a database using EpiData \[ 23 , 24 \]. A 10 ml
blood sample was drawn by the clinic phlebotomist at the time of
interview.

### Laboratory assessments

CD4 counts were done on the day of blood draw using a BD FACSCount ^TM^
. Plasma viral levels were assessed using the Roche Amplicor, version
1.5; Roche Diagnostics; lower limit of detection, 400 HIV RNA copies/ml.

For HIV genotyping, viral RNA was isolated from plasma samples with
viral load (VL) \>400 copies/ml using the MagNa Pure LC Total Nucleic
Acid Isolation kit on the MagNa Pure Automated System (Roche
Diagnostics) and sequenced using an in-house assay at the National
Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in Johannesburg \[ 25 \].
Mutations were identified using the Stanford HIVdb genotypic resistance
algorithm and then coded as major resistant mutations using the
International AIDS Society (IAS) list from December 2009 \[ 26 \]. HIV-1
subtype classifications were done using Rega v.2.0 \[ 27 \].

### Data analysis

We grouped patients per type of line regimen, i.e. first-line and
second-line, then a number of variables were examined as potential
predictors of viremia. For each variable we first calculated the
adjusted odds ratio (adj. OR 95% CI) and p-value controlling for gender,
education, type of clinic, age and self-reported adherence during the
last week-end, which is denoted as the basic adjusted model. The
presented adj. OR for the five variables in the previous sentence are
derived from a regression model including only these covariates.

All variables with p-values ≤0.15 in the basic adjusted model, were
added into a backward selection multiple logistic regression analysis
(inclusion criteria was p≤0.05) This model is denoted the final model.
The adherence variable was included in the model regardless of p-value.
Stata/SE College Station, Texas (version 10.1) was used for data
analysis \[ 30 \].



## RESULTS

### Patient characteristics

A total of 998 HIV-1 infected subjects receiving ART at either an NGO or
public clinic at the same hospital were interviewed for this study (
Table 1A ). The majority of the patients were women (75%), who, with a
median age of 41 years, were significantly older than the men (median
age 37 years) (p\<0.001). Overall, 78% had attained some secondary
education, 64% lived in a house, 24% lived in an informal dwelling
(shack), and 13% did not own a refrigerator. More than half of the study
population was in a partner relationship, 14% were married, \~14%
cohabitated and 24% reported a sexual relationship but lived alone. Only
3% of all patients reported more than one (\>1) sexual partner during
the last 3 months and the majority reported using condoms consistently.
Seventy percent of patients were unemployed and 7% were working in
casual or daily labour. Forty percent of the subjects relied on receipt
of a disability grant from social services of 940 South African Rands
(around \$122US) per month. Only 38% did not rely on others for monetary
support. The vast majority (91%) of patients used public transport to
attend outpatient ART clinics.

### Table 1

Patients\' characteristics

Overall

By type of clinic

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A. Demographic information

N

\%

NGO\
N (%)

Public\
N (%)

p value

**Gender**

Women

744

74.6%

388 (77.6%)

356 (71.5%)

Men

254

25.4%

112 (22.4%)

142 (28.5%)

0.03

**Age**

≤34

312

31.3

176 (35.2%)

136 (27.3%)

35-44

462

46.3

225 (45%)

237 (47.6%)

0.03

≥45

224

22.4

99 (19.8%)

125 (25.1%)

\<0.01

**Highest education level**

Never been to school

14

1.4%

8 (1.6%)

6 (1.2%)

Primary school

145

14.5%

44 (8.8%)

101 (20.3%)

0.04

Secondary school

779

78.1%

413 (82.6%)

366 (73.5%)

0.76

Tertiary

60

6%

35 (7%)

25 (5%)

0.93

**Type of housing**

House

639

64.1%

340 (68.1%)

299 (60%)

Informal dwelling (shacks)

241

24.2%

92 (18.4%)

149 (29.9%)

\<0.01

Other (either flat, shared room or other)

117

11.7%

67 (13.5%)

50 (10.1%)

0.42

**Have refrigerator in the household**

Yes

868

87%

415 (83.3%)

453 (90.6%)

No

130

13%

83 (16.7%)

47 (9.4%)

0.01

**In a relationship**

No (single, divorced, separated, widow)

482

48.4%

205 (41.2%)

277 (55.7%)

Yes (married, sex partner, cohabitation)

513

51.6%

293 (58.8%)

220 (44.3%)

\<0.01

**Number of sexual partners last 3 months**

0

325

32.7%

146 (29.3%)

179 (36.2%)

1

644

64.8%

339 (67.9%)

305 (61.6%)

0.02

2-4 partners

25

2.5%

14 (2.8%)

11 (2.2%)

0.28

**If \>1 partner, did you use condoms**

All the time

21

84%

12 (85.8%)

9 (81.8%)

Sometimes

3

12%

1 (7.1%)

2 (18.2%)

0.44

No, not at all

1

4%

1 (7.1%)

0

0.39

**Employment status**

Not employed

648

70.3%

309 (64.5%)

339 (76.5%)

Employed

274

29.7%

104 (35.3%)

170 (23.5%)

\<0.01

**Income** - \< median level = US\$ 122

609

61%

264 (52.8%)

345 (69.3%)

\<0.01

**On child support grant**

No

729

73.7%

346 (70%)

383 (77.4%)

Yes

260

26.3%

148 (30%)

112 (22.6)

\<0.01

**Transport to clinic**

Public transport

904

90.8%

447 (89.4%)

457 (92.1%)

Walking

52

5.2%

26 (5.2%)

26 (5.2%)

0.94

Own car

35

3.5%

23 (4.6%)

12 (2.4%)

0.06

Other

5

0.5%

4 (0.8%)

1 (0.2%)

0.17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**B. Clinical characteristics**

**N**

**%**

**NGO**

**Public**

**p value**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Time on ART (by months)**

12-23 months

154

15.4%

22 (4.4%)

132 (26.5%)

24-36 months

207

20.7%

41 (8.2%)

166 (33.3%)

0.17

\>36 months

637

63.9%

437 (87.4%)

200 (40.2%)

\<0.01

**Line regimen**

NNRTI based (i.e. first-line)

883

88.5%

431 (86.2%)

452 (90.8%)

PI based (i.e. second-line)

115

11.5%

69 (13.8%)

46 (9.2%)

0.02

**Missed any pills during last week-end**

No

941

95%

465 (93.6%)

476 (96.5%)

Yes

49

5%

32 (6.4%)

17 (3.5%)

0.03

**Currently on TB treatment** - yes

18

1.8%

10 (2%)

8 (1.6%)

0.64

**CD4 cell count**

\<=200 cells/μl

137

13.7%

47 (9.4%)

90 (18.1%)

\>200 cells/μl

861

86.3%

408 (90.6%)

453 (81.9%)

\<0.01

**VL \>400 HIV RNA copies/ml**

139

13.9%

55 (11%)

84 (16.9%)

0.01

NNRTI based

102

73.4%

43 (78.2%)

59 (70.2%)

PI based

37

26.6%

12 (21.8%)

25 (29.8%)

0.30

Open in a separate window

There were significant differences in the patient populations between
the two clinical sites. At the public clinic there was a higher
percentage of men, patients were older, single, lived in informal
dwellings, were poor and more likely to be unemployed compared to
patients attending the NGO clinic (p\<0.01 for all of the above
variables).

### Treatment and viremia

More than half (64%) of the study population had been on ART for longer
than 36 months (p\<0.01) ( Table 1B ). The majority (89%) were on an
NNRTI--based (first-line) and 12% were on a PI-based (second-line). A
larger proportion of patients were on second-line therapy at the NGO
clinic consistent with this site having a more ART-experienced
population. Five percent of patients reported having missed taking their
pills during the previous weekend and were classified as incompletely
adherent. This was more apparent for the patients attending the NGO
clinic (p=0.03).

Although more than 50% of all subjects reported previous treatment for
TB, only 2% (n=18) were receiving TB therapy at the time of study. Among
the 14 first-line recipients who were on TB therapy, 13 were on
stavudine, lamivudine and efavirenz and one was on zidovudine,
lamivudine and efavirenz. We found no significant difference in either
median time on ART or median CD4 cell count for TB versus non-TB
patients (data not shown).

At enrolment into the study, the median CD4 count for the group was 383
cells/μl (range 1-1,770). Viremic patients had a significantly lower CD4
count (214 cells/μl; range 1-764) compared to those who were suppressed
(414 cells/μl; range 40-1,770) (p\<0.001). Those at the public clinic
had lower CD4 counts.

Of the 998 patients, 139 (14%) had a VL \>400 copies/ml and were
therefore defined as viremic on ART, with a median of 10,500 copies/ml
(range 407 - 1,000,000). There was a higher prevalence of viremic
patients at the public clinic compared to the NGO clinic (17% vs. 11%,
p=0.01). Of the viremic patients, 102 were on first-line therapy and 37
were on a second-line regimen with a significant difference in median
viral levels (6,540 vs. 24,400 copies/ml respectively, p=0.01).

### Prevalence of HIV- drug resistance

Among the 139 patients with viremia, 129 (93%) plasma samples with a
median VL of 13,500 copies/ml were successfully genotyped versus 10
samples with a median of 2,025 copies/ml that could not be amplified \[
28 \] (p=0.04). Of the successfully sequenced samples, 128 were HIV-1
subtype C and one was subtype B.

Seventy-eight percent of viremic patients had at least one DR mutation
and 52% (67/129) harboured both NNRTI and NRTI resistance mutations (
Table 2 ). Of the 94 viremic patients on the first-line regimen, 64%
(n=60), 81% (n=76), and 2% (n=2) had evidence of NRTI, NNRTI, and PI
resistance respectively; M184V/I and K103N were the most prevalent
mutations (62% (n=58) and 48% (n=45) respectively), and 16% (n=15) had
TAMs. Among the 35 viremic patients failing a second-line regimen, 29%
(n=10), 54% (n=19) and 6% (n=2) patients had mutations associated with
NRTI resistance (mainly M184V/I, n=9), NNRTI resistance (mainly K103N,
n=15), and major PI mutations respectively. The two patients with PI
mutations harboured either Q58E, L90M or N88S. All PI recipients were on
lopinavir/ritonavir, except for one patient receiving ritonavir and
atazanavir.

### Table 2

Number and type of HIV-1 drug resistance mutations

Mutation

Number (%) of patients

------------------------------------------------------------------------

First-line regimen

Second-line regimen

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NRTI resistance

N=94

N=35

Any NRTI mutations

60 (63.8%)

10 (28.6%)

M184V/I

58 (61.7%)

9 (25.7%)

TAMs

15 (16%)

2 (5.7%)

D67N

11 (11.7%)

1 (2.9%)

T215Y/F

5 (5.3%)

1 (2.9%)

K70R

4 (4.3%)

1 (2.9%)

K219Q/E

4 (4.3%)

1 (2.9%)

M41L

3 (3.2%)

0

A62V

3 (3.2%)

0

V75I

3 (3.2%)

0

K65R

1 (1.1%)

0

L74V

1 (1.1%)

0

L210W

1 (1.1%)

0

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**NNRTI resistance**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Any NNRTI mutation

76 (80.8%)

19 (54.3%)

K103N

45 (47.9%)

15 (42.9%)

V106A/M

25 (26.6%)

2 (5.7%)

G190S/A

13 (13.8%)

1 (2.9%)

Y188C/L/H

13 (13.8%)

1 (2.9%)

K101E/H/P

12 (12.8%)

1 (2.9%)

P225H

10 (10.6%)

5 (14.3%)

Y181C/I/V

3 (3.2%)

0

L100I

1 (1.1%)

0

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**PI resistance**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Any PI mutation

2 (2.1%)

2 (5.7%)

Q58E

1 (1.1%)

1 (2.9%)

M46L

1 (1.1%)

0

L90M

0

1 (2.9%)

N88S

0

1 (2.9%)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Any resistance mutation**

101/129 (78.3%)

**NNRTI and NRTI**\
**resistance**

67/129 (52.0%)

**NRTI and PI resistance**

2/129 (1.6%)

**NNRTI, NRTI and PI**\
**resistance**

0

Open in a separate window

There were no significant differences in the frequency of mutations in
samples with viral level below or above 5,000 copies/ml (78% vs. 65%
respectively, p=0.10) which is the recommended cut-off for switching
adult patients failing first-line regimens in the South African clinical
guidelines at the time of the study \[ 4 \].

### Risk factors for viremia

In order to determine factors associated with viremia we performed a
multiple logistic regression analysis using a full and a reduced model
(see Methods for description). Among 883 patients on a first-line
regimen, viremia was significantly associated with self-reported poor
adherence (OR 2.7, 95% CI 1.3-5.6, p=0.01) during the previous weekend
and being on TB treatment in both models (OR 6.4, 95% CI 2.2-18.8,
p\<0.01) ( Table 3 ). There was no significant association between
viremia and gender, type of clinic and duration of treatment for those
on first-line ART. In addition we found no significant association
between viremia and age, education level, being unemployed or income
level (data not shown).

### Table 3

Risk factors for viremia

Patients\'\
Characteristics

Basic\
adjusted\
model

Final model

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VL\>400 RNA\
copies/ml

VL\<400\
RNA\
copies/ml

Adj. OR\
(95% CI) ^\*^

P\
value

OR\
(95% CI)

P\
Value

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NNRTI based regimen

**Gender**

Men

30 (12.7%)

207 (87.3%)

1

Women

72 (11.2%)

573 (88.8%)

0.9 (0.6-1.5)

0.75

**Missed any pills during last**\
**week-end**

No

92 (90.2%)

740 (95.8)

1

1

Yes

10 (9.8%)

32 (4.2%)

2.5 (1.2-5.4)

0.02

2.7 (1.3-5.6)

0.01

**On a child support grant**

No

68 (10.4%)

584 (89.6%)

1

Yes

33 (14.9%)

189 (85.1%)

1.6 (0.9-2.6)

0.08

**On a disability grant**

No

58 (10.9%)

473 (89.1%)

1

Yes

43 (12.5%)

300 (87.5%)

1.2 (0.8-1.9)

0.40

**Type of clinic**

NGO

43 (10%)

388 (90%)

1

Public

59 (13.1%)

392 (86.9%)

1.4 (0.9-2.2)

0.12

**Currently on TB treatment**

No

96 (11.2%)

772 (88.9%)

1

1

Yes

6 (42.9%)

8 (57.1%)

7.0 (2.3-20.9)

\<0.01

6.4 (2.2-18.8)

\<0.01

**Have refrigerator in the**\
**household**

Yes

85 (11.2%)

675 (88.8%)

No

17 (14%)

104 (86%)

1.1 (0.6-2.1)

0.71

**Time on ART**

12-23 months

22 (14.3%)

132 (85.7%)

1

24-36 months

24 (13.3%)

157 (86.7%)

1.0 (0.5-1.8)

0.93

≥ 37 months

56 (10.2%)

491 (89.8%)

0.8 (0.4-1.4)

0.46

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**PI based regimen**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Gender**

Men

10 (58.8%)

7 (41.2%)

1

Women

27 (27.5%)

71 (72.5%)

0.5 (0.2-1.6)

0.24

**Missed any pills during last**\
**week-end**

No

34 (92%)

74 (94.9%)

1

Yes

3 (8.1%)

4 (5.1%)

2.8 (0.4-19.6)

0.29

**On a child support grant**

No

30 (39.5%)

46 (60.5%)

1

Yes

7 (18.4%)

31 (81.6%)

0.5 (0.2-1.5)

0.23

**On a disability grant**

No

30 (39.5%)

46 (60.5%)

1

Yes

7 (18.4%)

31 (81.6%)

0.9 (0.4-2.3)

0.89

**Type of clinic**

NGO

12 (17.4%)

57 (82.6%)

1

1

Public

25 (54.3%)

21 (45.7%)

5.8 (2.1-16.1)

\<0.01

4.6 (1.8-11.3)

\<0.01

**Currently on TB treatment**

No

33 (29.7%)

78 (70.3%)

1

Yes

4 (100%)

0

NA

0.01

**Have refrigerator at the**\
**household**

Yes

30 (28.3%)

76 (71.7%)

1

No

7 (77.8%)

2 (22.2%)

4.2 (0.7-26.8)

0.10

6.7 (1.2-37.5)

0.03

**Time on ART**

12-23 months

0

0

24-36 months

11 (42.3%)

15 (57.7%)

1

≥ 37 months

26 (29.2%)

63 (70.8%)

0.7 (0.3-2.1)

0.56

Open in a separate window

^\*^ Adjusted for gender, education, clinic type, age and adherence
during the week-end prior to the study interview

For the 115 patients on a second-line regimen there was a higher risk of
virological failure associated with attending the public clinic (OR 4.6,
95% CI 1.8-11.3, p\<0.01) and not having a refrigerator at home (OR 6.7,
95% CI 1.2-37.5, p=0.03). In the basic adjusted model, receipt of TB
treatment was significantly associated with viremia (p\<0.01). Since all
four TB patients were viremic it was not possible to fit the final
model. There was no risk of viremia associated with reported incomplete
adherence during the previous weekend (OR 2.8, 95% CI 0.4-19.6, p=0.29)
unlike what was seen among first-line failures.

Further analysis was done among patients failing first-line therapy with
either DR mutant or wild-type viremia. Ninety-six percent (96%) of those
with DR mutations reported good adherence. In contrast, only 63% of
patients exhibiting wild-type virus reported good adherence (p\<0.01,
data not shown).



## DISCUSSION

In this cross-sectional study among nearly 1,000 South African HIV-1
infected patients where the majority had been on ART for more than three
years, we found a 14% prevalence of viremia, 78% of whom had HIV DR
strains. As anticipated, self-reported lapses in adherence to ART were
strongly associated with viremia. Furthermore, ongoing TB treatment was
a risk factor for failing first-line ART. Among second-line ART
recipients, virological failure was associated with attending a larger,
less resourced public clinic and not owning a refrigerator.
Nevertheless, despite poor socio-economic conditions, the majority of
patients in this study were fully suppressed and highly adherent after
many years on ART.

The strongest predictor for viremia was concomitant TB treatment, which
may relate to multiple factors such as reduced ART adherence during
severe illness, increased pill burden, exacerbation of side effects, and
drug interactions with rifampicin which may reduce NNRTI and PI levels
in plasma concentrations \[ 29 \]. While studies have not focused
specifically on adherence to ART among TB patients, we suspect that
adherence to concomitant ART and TB treatment is made difficult for
patients when care is not integrated which increases waiting times and
transport costs. In a recent review by Lawn and co-workers, TB incidence
rates on ART were shown to decrease over time, but baseline CD4 cell
count, gender and socioeconomic conditions still influenced TB
acquisition on ART \[ 30 \]. Given that UNAIDS reports that more than
half of TB patients are HIV infected and that in this study most
patients had previously received TB treatment, better integration of HIV
and TB care should be encouraged \[ 31 \].

Not all patients in this study who reported recent poor adherence were
viremic at the time of the interview. This may confirm the findings of
Rosenblum and co-workers who showed that the longer patients are
virologically suppressed on ART, the less likely they are to become
viremic after missing taking any of their pills \[ 32 \]. The increased
frequency of virologic failure among patients at the public clinic may
reflect the higher workload, higher patient-to-provider ratio and more
limited-resources in the public sector. Fielding and co-workers made a
similar finding when comparing 39 HIV clinics in South Africa that used
the same clinical guidelines. They speculate that this is related to
long waiting times at the clinic and/or pharmacy and lack of resources
to follow-up patients for their clinic/drug refill appointments \[ 14
\]. In addition, the patients attending the public clinic were more
financially and socially vulnerable compared to their peers at the NGO
clinic; however they reported higher adherence levels compared to the
NGO clinic. We found that patients who did not own a refrigerator were
more likely to fail their second-line regimen. Lopinavir/ritonavir
currently used in South Africa, prescribed as three pills to be taken
twice per day, is a soft gel capsule requiring refrigeration,
highlighting the need for a heat-stable formulation particularly in
areas with poor socio-economic conditions.

Among viremic patients, 78% had resistance mutations and the mutational
patterns were similar to recently reported studies from South Africa \[
15 , 16 , 33 - 35 \] and other limited-resource countries that use the
same first-line regimens \[ 13 , 33 - 38 \]. Thus, M184V/I, K103N and
V106A/M were the most common mutations due to lamivudine and NNRTI use.
However, in contrast to three other studies from South Africa there was
a relatively lower prevalence of TAMs \[ 15 , 16 , 18 \]. Interestingly,
among patients failing second-line ART, most were found to harbour DR
mutations associated with failure of line-one regimens (particularly the
NNRTI mutation, K103N), and there was an extraordinary paucity of PI
related mutations. This suggests the inability of lopinavir/ritonavir to
select PI resistance mutations at high levels as noted by others \[ 39 ,
40 \] and re-emergence of archived mutations from first-line NNRTI
regimens.

There are several limitations to this cross-sectional study. A recent
review showed that as many as 50% of patients die or are lost to
follow-up during the first 24 months on ART in sub-Saharan Africa \[ 41
\]. Thus, the patients studied here may represent those who were the
most adherent and who remained in treatment which reduces the
sensitivity of identifying risk factors associated with failure. A
further caveat is that the use of self-reported missed doses over the
previous weekend as a proxy for adherence. While adherence is known to
change over time \[ 42 \], this measure has been successfully used by
others \[ 10 , 19 , 43 - 45 \]. Given the long-term treatment nature of
this cohort and the possibility of recall bias, we chose to use this
indicator which was predictive, at least among first-line ART
recipients. Patients were recruited through invitation, and we only
captured an estimated 10-20% of eligible patients while attending either
the clinic or the pharmacy, and thus was not a random sampling. However,
the demographic characteristics, including gender, age and marital
status, of our study participants are consistent with national
statistics and were similar to a larger number studied by Rosen at
multiple-sites in South Africa \[ 46 \]. The rate of detection of
viremia was consistent with a recent report from South Africa, of
viremia on ART after 12 months \[ 14 \]. We were unable to adjust for
baseline viral load, CD4 and DR as this data was not available on all
subjects. However, the prevalence of transmitted ART resistance among
South African patients initiated on ART 2-5 years ago is likely to be
low (\<5%) \[ 28 , 47 \].

We found that the majority of viremic patients who were failing their
first-line regimen already had regimen specific DR, irrespective of
their viral load level. This confirms Aleman and co-workers findings
that DR mutations may occur among viremic patients at low and stable
viral load level \[ 48 \]. These findings underscore the importance of
viral load monitoring to identify treatment failure. National guidelines
mandate that those with viremia on a first-line regimen be switched to a
second-line regimen. Our data showed that approximately a quarter of
patients failed without evidence of major DR mutations. These
individuals may re-suppress with adherence to first-line drugs \[ 17 \]
although the presence of minority quasispecies may compromise treatment
outcomes \[ 49 \] and thus the most appropriate intervention may be to
switch to a second-line regimen even in cases of wild-type viremia.

In summary, risk factors for virological failure were line-regimen
dependent. Increased attention to adherence particularly among those
receiving concomitant TB treatment may reduce virologic failure among
first-line ART recipients. With the availability of regular subsidised
VL assessments, the public health care system in South Africa can
identify viremia and initiate second-line treatment. However, further
clinical research is needed to identify the causes of second-line
failure and to improve the response to second-line regimens with
alternatives to lopinavir/ritonavir-based treatment. Assessment of drug
resistance, in addition to VL monitoring and adherence counselling
before a change in therapy, warrants further investigation.



## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Ms. Ntshebo Mirriam Moeketsi and Ms. Alina
Malebye for conducting interviews; Dr. Modise Maphutha for assisting
during the pilot study; Sisters Noreen Boikanyo, Rebecca Phofa,
Catherine Lephoto, Agnes Ramashiga and Fikile Mbatha for study
logistics; Ms. Sarah Cohen, Ms. Mary Phoswa and Ms. Maphuti Madiga for
processing blood specimens; Ms. Ewalde Cutler and Prof. Adrian Puren for
the viral load and CD4 cell counts; Dr. David Bangsberg for discussion
on adherence and viremia and Dr. Francois Venter and Dr. Christopher
Hoffmann for constructive critiques. We are grateful to the patients for
agreeing to participate and sharing their experiences in this study.

FUNDING

This study was funded by: the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency (Sida) to ZEK and NICD and a Karolinska Institutet
faculty award (KID) to ZEK; African Programme for Training in HIV/TB
Research Fogarty International Center/NIH 2 U2R TW006878 and from the
Freeman-Spogli Institute at Stanford University, Presidential Fund for
Innovation in International Studies (226-2009); Salaries of two Research
Assistants were provided by the PEPFAR-scholarship program.



## Footnotes

**Note:** Part of this work was presented at the 16th Conference on
Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI), Montreal, Canada,
February 7-11, 2009.

**Competing interests:** The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for
publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early
version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting,
typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in
its final citable form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

