Evolution of a novel pathway leading to dolutegravir resistance in a
patient harbouring N155H and multiclass drug resistance \| Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy \| Oxford Academic

Skip to Main Content

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

Journals

Books

-

-

-

-

-

-

-
Sign in through your institution

-   Issues
-   More Content
-   BSAC Journals
-   Submit
-   Purchase
-   Alerts
-   About

Close

Navbar Search Filter Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy This issue
BSAC Journals Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Infectious Diseases
Medical Microbiology and Virology Books Journals Oxford Academic Enter
search term Search

Advanced Search

Article Navigation

Volume 70

Issue 2

February 2015

### Article Contents

-
Introduction

-
Methods

-
Results

-
Discussion

-
Funding

-
Transparency declarations

-
Author contributions

-
Acknowledgements

-
References

-
Author notes

-   \< Previous
-   Next \>

Journal Article


# Evolution of a novel pathway leading to dolutegravir resistance in a patient harbouring N155H and multiclass drug resistance

Isabelle Hardy

,

Bluma Brenner

,

Peter Quashie

,

Réjean Thomas

,

Christos Petropoulos

,

Wei Huang

,

Daniela Moisi

,

Mark A. Wainberg

,

Michel Roger

Author Notes

*Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy* , Volume 70, Issue 2, February
2015, Pages 405--411, https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dku387

Published:

03 October 2014

Article history

-    PDF

-    Split View

-

-
Cite

-

* Permissions Icon * Permissions

-   * Share Icon * Share


##

Objectives

Dolutegravir has been recently approved for treatment-naive and
-experienced HIV-infected subjects, including integrase inhibitor
(INI)-experienced patients. Dolutegravir is a second-generation INI that
can overcome many prior raltegravir and elvitegravir failures. Here, we
report the evolution of resistance to dolutegravir in a highly
treatment-experienced patient harbouring the major N155H mutation
consequent to raltegravir treatment failure.

Methods

Genotypic and phenotypic analyses were done on longitudinal samples to
determine viral resistance to INIs. Integrase amino acid sequence
interactions with raltegravir and dolutegravir were assessed by
molecular modelling and docking simulations.

Results

Five mutations (A49P, L68FL, T97A, E138K and L234V) were implicated in
emergent dolutegravir resistance, with a concomitant severe compromise
in viral replicative capacity. Molecular modelling and docking
simulations revealed that dolutegravir binding to integrase was affected
by these acquired dolutegravir mutations.

Conclusions

Our findings identify a novel mutational pathway involving integrase
mutations A49P and L234V, leading to dolutegravir resistance in a
patient with the N155H raltegravir mutation.

HIV-1 , integrase inhibitors , mutations , phenotype , genotype

Topic:

-    phenotype
-    mutation
-    drug resistance
-    genotype
-    integrase
-    treatment failure
-    elvitegravir
-    raltegravir
-    dolutegravir

Issue Section:

ORIGINAL RESEARCH


## Introduction

Antiretroviral therapy (ARV) has revolutionized HIV/AIDS management,
reducing viral burden, HIV transmission and the emergence of drug
resistance. Nevertheless, selection of salvage therapies for heavily
treatment-experienced patients harbouring multiclass drug resistance
remains problematic. HIV integrase inhibitors (INIs), including
raltegravir, elvitegravir and dolutegravir, are the most recent class of
ARV drugs. Overall, raltegravir and elvitegravir share common resistance
pathways, with major mutations in the integrase gene at positions
Q148H/R/K and N155H for both drugs. ^\ \ 1\ --\ \ \ 3^ Additionally, the
Y143R/C/H pathway has been associated with raltegravir resistance and
the T66I/A/K and E92Q mutations preferentially confer elvitegravir
resistance.

Dolutegravir is a second-generation INI, showing a higher genetic
barrier to resistance. *In vitro* , dolutegravir is active against
viruses with resistance mutations to raltegravir and elvitegravir and
has a distinct resistance profile involving mutations such as S153YF,
R263K and G118R. ^\ \ 4\ --\ \ \ 7^ In the VIKING-3 clinical study,
dolutegravir remained active in highly treatment-experienced patients
with INI-resistant viruses. ^\ \ 8^ The strongest predictive factor for
dolutegravir responsiveness is baseline resistance. Subjects with Q148
plus two or more secondary mutations (G140A/C/S, L74I or E138A/K/T)
showed lower likelihood (96%) of achieving HIV RNA \<50 copies/mL than
subjects with Y143, N155, T66 or E92 mutations at week 24 on
dolutegravir-containing regimens. Overall, dolutegravir can salvage most
prior INI-treatment failures depending on the resistance pathway.

Here, we report the evolution of resistance to dolutegravir in a highly
treatment-experienced patient harbouring the major N155H mutation
consequent to raltegravir treatment failure. Our results show that a
dolutegravir-containing regimen was unable to suppress viral
replication, leading to rapid development of resistance. Five mutations
(A49P, L68FL, T97A, E138K and L234V) were implicated in emergent
dolutegravir resistance with a concomitant severe compromise in viral
replicative capacity. Molecular modelling and docking simulations
revealed that dolutegravir binding to integrase was affected by these
acquired dolutegravir mutations. These results demonstrate that
resistance to dolutegravir during salvage therapy may occur via novel
pathways. Consequently, genotypic monitoring of dolutegravir clinical
resistance in these patients is of great importance.


## Methods

### HIV viral load measurements and CD4 T cell counts

HIV RNA plasma viral loads were determined using the Versant HIV-1 RNA
3.0 assay (bDNA, Bayer HealthCare) until June 2010 and the Abbott
Real-Time HIV-1 kit thereafter. CD4 T cell counts were evaluated every
3--6 months as suggested by Quebec provincial guidelines (
http://publications.msss.gouv.qc.ca/acrobat/f/documentation/2010/10-337-02W.pdf
).

### Genotypic resistance analysis

The full-length integrase (867 bp) and protease/reverse transcriptase
(1467 bp) genes were analysed by nested RT--PCR and sequenced using the
BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing v1.0 Ready Reaction kit (Life
Technologies), as previously described. ^\ \ 9\ ,\ \ \ 10^ Briefly,
sequences were compared with HXB2 by using Seqscape v2.5 (Applied
Biosystems) to determine substitutions. Resistance interpretations were
subsequently assessed by Stanford HIVdb v7.0 (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/ ).

### Phenotypic resistance analysis

The previously genotyped plasmas were sent for analysis of phenotypic
susceptibility to INIs, NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs to Monogram Biosciences,
where the highly sensitive phenotypic resistance assays PhenoSense ^®^
and PhenoSense ^®^ Integrase (Monogram Biosciences) were performed.

### Structural bioinformatics: integrase modelling and dolutegravir docking simulations

To model interactions of integrase with raltegravir and dolutegravir,
integrase amino acid sequences prior to treatment with INIs (29 August
2009) and following raltegravir failure (16 February 2012) and
dolutegravir failure (30 October 2013) were submitted to the I-TASSER 3D
protein prediction server, as previously described. ^\ \ 11\ ,\ \ \ 12^
Apparent binding poses and energies of dolutegravir interactions at the
active site of modelled integrase proteins were calculated by *in
silico* docking simulations performed with the program AutoDockVina.
^\ \ 13^ The viral DNA mimic, cations and active site water molecules
from 3S3M were retained in equivalent positions within the HIV active
sites to aid in assessment of INI binding. Prior to docking, ligands and
receptor proteins were processed in AutoDockTools. ^\ \ 14^ All
subsequent image processing and analysis was performed in pymol (
http://pymol.org/ , PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3;
Schrödinger, LLC).


## Results

### Patient history

This patient had been under HIV treatment for 20 years and had received
drugs against all available ARV targets, including raltegravir (5
October 2009 to 21 April 2010; 11 May 2011 to 15 February 2012) and
dolutegravir (15 February 2012 to 10 March 2014). Evolution of viral
load and CD4 T cell counts over time is depicted in Figure 1 . Over 20
years of treatment, a slow decline of CD4 T cell count was observed
(from 549 cells/mm ^3^ in 1994 to 160 cells/mm ^3^ in 2014). Short
treatment interruptions (years 2000, 2008 and 2011) led to episodic
bursts in viral load but this did not influence the overall decline
(Figure 1 ). In addition, it should be noted that viral load since 1994
became undetectable (\<40 copies/mL) only once (not shown) as a result
of adding dolutegravir to the treatment regimen (1 May 2012).
Nevertheless, viral load rebound occurred the following month.

Figure 1.

Plasma HIV viral loads and CD4 cell counts over time and during
treatment with INIs. ARVs included raltegravir (5 October 2009 to 21
April 2010; 11 May 2011 to 15 February 2012) and dolutegravir (15
February 2012 to 10 March 2014). From 2000, one representative value per
year was included in our graph for viral load (VL) and CD4. RAL,
raltegravir; DTG, dolutegravir.

Open in new tab Download slide

As previously mentioned, the patient was heavily treatment experienced.
Genotypic analysis revealed a dominant MDR virus harbouring mutations
conferring resistance to NRTIs (M41L, D67N, V118I, M184V, L210W, T215Y)
and NNRTIs (K101P, K103N/S, V108I, V179T, V189I), as well as PIs (L10F,
I13V, K20M, V32I, L33F, M36I, M46L, I54L, K55R, L63P, A71I, G73A, I84V,
L90M). The cumulative effects of this resistance profile on phenotypic
susceptibility to NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs are depicted in Table 1 . As
expected, the viral population showed multiclass drug resistance to all
ARV drugs, with limited residual activity for tenofovir and tipranavir.

Table 1.

Phenotypic profile of NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs

.

.

Phenotypic susceptibility to NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs (fold change) ^a^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

NRTIs

ZDV

d4T

TFV

ABC

ddI

FTC

3TC

13.0

2.64

1.87

6.04

2.19

\>

\>

NNRTIs

EFV

ETR

NVP

RPV

\>

\>

\>

\>

PIs

ATV

DRV

AMP

IDV

LPV

NFV

RTV

SQV

TPV

\>

\>

\>

95.4

\>

\>

\>

\>

18.7

ZDV, zidovudine; d4T, stavudine; TFV, tenofovir; ABC, abacavir; ddI,
didanosine; FTC, emtricitabine; 3TC, lamivudine; EFV, efavirenz; ETR,
etravirine; NVP, nevirapine; RPV, rilpivirine; ATV, atazanavir; DRV,
darunavir; AMP, amprenavir; IDV, indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV,
nelfinavir; RTV, ritonavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV, tipranavir.

^a^ Fold change in IC ~50~ compared with reference; \>, more than the
maximum fold change tested in the assay.

Table 1.

Phenotypic profile of NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs

.

.

Phenotypic susceptibility to NRTIs, NNRTIs and PIs (fold change) ^a^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

NRTIs

ZDV

d4T

TFV

ABC

ddI

FTC

3TC

13.0

2.64

1.87

6.04

2.19

\>

\>

NNRTIs

EFV

ETR

NVP

RPV

\>

\>

\>

\>

PIs

ATV

DRV

AMP

IDV

LPV

NFV

RTV

SQV

TPV

\>

\>

\>

95.4

\>

\>

\>

\>

18.7

ZDV, zidovudine; d4T, stavudine; TFV, tenofovir; ABC, abacavir; ddI,
didanosine; FTC, emtricitabine; 3TC, lamivudine; EFV, efavirenz; ETR,
etravirine; NVP, nevirapine; RPV, rilpivirine; ATV, atazanavir; DRV,
darunavir; AMP, amprenavir; IDV, indinavir; LPV, lopinavir; NFV,
nelfinavir; RTV, ritonavir; SQV, saquinavir; TPV, tipranavir.

^a^ Fold change in IC ~50~ compared with reference; \>, more than the
maximum fold change tested in the assay.

### Evolution of resistance to INIs

From October 2009, INIs were included in ARV regimens. A pre-INI
genotype revealed many natural polymorphisms associated with resistance
to INIs (R20K, V31I, L45I, L101I, I135V, E157Q, K160Q, V201I, K215N and
A265V), none of which conferred reduced phenotypic susceptibility to
raltegravir, elvitegravir or dolutegravir (Table 2 ). Subsequent to
raltegravir treatment failure, the patient acquired N155H (October
2010), which persisted thereafter on raltegravir- or
dolutegravir-containing regimens. This mutation conferred 14.3-fold and
29.6-fold reductions in raltegravir and elvitegravir susceptibility,
respectively (Tables 2 and 3 ). Although N155H briefly disappeared
during a transient treatment interruption (February 2011),
re-introduction of raltegravir in May 2011 led to its reappearance, with
the subsequent acquisition of S119R, S147G and V151I in February 2012.
This resistance profile led to a 34.6-fold and 56.3-fold elevated
cross-resistance to raltegravir and elvitegravir, respectively (Tables 2
and 3 ). The virus remained sensitive to dolutegravir (1.9-fold
resistance) and the patient was switched to a dolutegravir-based regimen
in February 2012.

Table 2.

Phenotypic profiles for INI-containing regimens

.

Phenotypic susceptibility to INI-containing regimens

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

.

Pre-INIs .

RAL .

RAL .

Tx-I .

RAL .

DTG .

DTG .

DTG .

.

25 August 2009 .

27 January 2010 .

10 March 2010 .

9 February 2011 .

16 February 2012 .

11 December 2012 .

30 October 2013 .

20 January 2014 .

VL (copies/mL)

8170

3564

5918

23 635

15 422

2568

2125

31 308

RAL FC

1.27

1.56

14.3

1.57

34.6

\>150

\>150

\>150

EVG FC

1.59

1.76

29.6

1.41

56.3

\>150

\>150

\>150

DTG FC

1.14

1.17

1.67

1.08

1.99

37.0

63.6

55.4

RC (%)

127

187

111

125

101

53

47

41

VL, viral load; RAL, raltegravir; EVG, elvitegravir; DTG, dolutegravir;
Tx-I, treatment interruption on INI regimen; FC, fold change; RC,
replicative capacity.

Table 2.

Phenotypic profiles for INI-containing regimens

.

Phenotypic susceptibility to INI-containing regimens

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

.

Pre-INIs .

RAL .

RAL .

Tx-I .

RAL .

DTG .

DTG .

DTG .

.

25 August 2009 .

27 January 2010 .

10 March 2010 .

9 February 2011 .

16 February 2012 .

11 December 2012 .

30 October 2013 .

20 January 2014 .

VL (copies/mL)

8170

3564

5918

23 635

15 422

2568

2125

31 308

RAL FC

1.27

1.56

14.3

1.57

34.6

\>150

\>150

\>150

EVG FC

1.59

1.76

29.6

1.41

56.3

\>150

\>150

\>150

DTG FC

1.14

1.17

1.67

1.08

1.99

37.0

63.6

55.4

RC (%)

127

187

111

125

101

53

47

41

VL, viral load; RAL, raltegravir; EVG, elvitegravir; DTG, dolutegravir;
Tx-I, treatment interruption on INI regimen; FC, fold change; RC,
replicative capacity.

Table 3.

Genotypic analysis of emergent resistance to INI-containing regimens

.

Amino acid changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

Genotypic profile

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

Pre-INIs .

RAL .

RAL .

Tx-I .

RAL .

DTG .

DTG .

DTG .

WT .

resistant .

25 August 2009 .

27 January 2010 .

10 March 2010 .

9 February 2011 .

16 February 2012 .

11 December 2012 .

30 October 2013 .

20 January 2014 .

N155

N155H

---

---

H

---

H

H

H

H

A49

A49P

---

---

---

---

---

---

P

P

L68

L68FL

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

F/L

T97

T97A

---

---

---

---

---

A

A

A

S119

S119R

---

---

---

---

S/R

R

R

R

E138

E138K

---

---

---

---

---

K

K

K

S147

S147G

---

---

---

---

G

G

G

G

V151

V151I

---

---

---

---

I

I

I

I

L234

L234V

---

---

---

---

---

---

V

V

RAL, raltegravir; EVG, elvitegravir; DTG, dolutegravir; Tx-I, treatment
interruption on INI regimen.

Table 3.

Genotypic analysis of emergent resistance to INI-containing regimens

.

Amino acid changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

Genotypic profile

------------------------------------------------------------------------

.

Pre-INIs .

RAL .

RAL .

Tx-I .

RAL .

DTG .

DTG .

DTG .

WT .

resistant .

25 August 2009 .

27 January 2010 .

10 March 2010 .

9 February 2011 .

16 February 2012 .

11 December 2012 .

30 October 2013 .

20 January 2014 .

N155

N155H

---

---

H

---

H

H

H

H

A49

A49P

---

---

---

---

---

---

P

P

L68

L68FL

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

F/L

T97

T97A

---

---

---

---

---

A

A

A

S119

S119R

---

---

---

---

S/R

R

R

R

E138

E138K

---

---

---

---

---

K

K

K

S147

S147G

---

---

---

---

G

G

G

G

V151

V151I

---

---

---

---

I

I

I

I

L234

L234V

---

---

---

---

---

---

V

V

RAL, raltegravir; EVG, elvitegravir; DTG, dolutegravir; Tx-I, treatment
interruption on INI regimen.

The patient developed treatment failure with 63.6-fold resistance to
dolutegravir and a maximum of 150-fold cross-resistance to raltegravir
and elvitegravir (Table 2 ). The N155H, S119R, S147G and V151I mutations
that were acquired secondary to raltegravir usage persisted throughout
dolutegravir treatment. The acquisition of T97A and E138K led to a
37-fold reduction in dolutegravir susceptibility. The sequential
acquisition of the A49P, L68FL and L234V mutations after dolutegravir
usage led to a further 63-fold decline in phenotypic susceptibility to
dolutegravir.

The sequential acquisition of dolutegravir resistance mutations was
associated with significant declines in viral replicative capacity (41%)
relative to levels observed (101%--187%) prior to use of dolutegravir in
treatment (Table 2 ). Consistent with this negative effect on
replication, we were unable to grow the virus in culture (data not
shown), although p24 antigen was detected.

### Integrase modelling

Insofar as emergent clinical resistance to dolutegravir is rare and
largely undefined, structural bioinformatics were used to gain insights
regarding the impact of mutations arising following treatment failure on
raltegravir- and dolutegravir-based regimens. Three-dimensional models
of viral nucleotide sequences of integrase prior to INI exposure (25
August 2009), following raltegravir failure (16 February 2012) and
dolutegravir failure (30 October 2013) were obtained (Figure 2 ). After
raltegravir failure via the N155H mutation, the positions of active site
catalytic residues (D64, D116, E152) and orientations remained
relatively unchanged (Figure 2 a), as has been previously reported.
^\ \ 15^ The substituted N155H affected the electrochemistry of the
active site, potentially forming a salt bridge with E152 and a hydrogen
bond with T66, without seriously modifying global integrase structure.
Minor steric rearrangements provided by the accessory mutations S119R,
I135V and V151I might allow integration in the presence of N155H.
^\ \ 3^

Figure 2.

Structural modelling of integrase pre-INIs, post-raltegravir (RAL) and
post-dolutegravir (DTG) with simulated binding of DTG to the active
site. (a) Overlay of pre-INI (blue) and RAL-exposed (salmon pink)
integrase showing 155H forming hydrogen bonds with T66 and E152. (b)
Active site catalytic residues (D64, D116, E152) in pre-INI (blue), RAL-
(salmon pink) and DTG-exposed (green) integrase. The D64 catalytic
residue (green) is outside the active site in the DTG-exposed integrase.
Major secondary structure variations are observed along the loop flanked
by residue 50 (long black arrows) to residue 65 (short black arrows)
(colours: deep blue, INI-naive; brown, RAL-exposed; yellow,
DTG-exposed). (c) Overlay of RAL- (salmon pink) and DTG-exposed (green)
integrase showing major changes in secondary structure. (d) DTG docking
into post-RAL integrase (salmon pink) is in good agreement with the
reference crystallized pose (shown in black sticks). (e--g) Docking of
DTG to post-DTG integrase (green) shows that it does not bind as the
reference position. The favourable binding position is to the viral DNA
mimic (1/40) (e); there is less favourable (9/40) binding to the
disordered loop (f) and even less favourable (29/40) binding in a
similar pose to the reference (g). This figure appears in colour in the
online version of *JAC* and in black and white in the print version of
*JAC* .

Open in new tab Download slide

In contrast, the acquisition of the five additional resistance mutations
with dolutegravir (A49P, T97A, E138K, S147G and L234V) led to major
deviations between pre- and post-dolutegravir integrase structures in
the loop region flanked by the C65 and M50 residues (indicated by black
arrows in Figure 2 b). The mis-positioning of D64 completely outside the
active site (Figure 2 b and c) suggests a marked impairment in the
ability of the virus to integrate. Whereas the A49P and L234V mutations
were distal to the active site, T97A, E138K and S147G were in close
proximity to the catalytic residues (Figure 2 c). More importantly, A49P
and L234V were in close proximity to each other, and may have been the
catalyst for major structural changes following the use of dolutegravir.
Indeed, the disordered loop seen in the structure extending from residue
50 to residue 65 was directly downstream of position 49P (Figure 2 c).

### Dolutegravir docking simulations

To mimic the drug binding of dolutegravir *in vivo* , dolutegravir was
docked to dimeric structures using DNA and Mg ^2+^ derived from the
prototype foamy virus (PFV) structure 3S3M co-ligands. After docking,
the relative position of dolutegravir crystallized into the PFV
structure was used as a visual guide for properly docked dolutegravir.
As expected, dolutegravir docked easily to both pre-INIs (data not
shown) and post-raltegravir integrase structures in the predicted 'most
energetically favourable (1/40)' poses (Figure 2 d). In contrast,
dolutegravir did not bind favourably in the post-dolutegravir model
(Figure 2 e--g). Indeed, docking of dolutegravir to the
post-dolutegravir structure shows that binding was favourable (1/40) to
the viral DNA mimic (Figure 2 e), but less favourable (9/40) to the
disordered loop (Figure 2 f). Furthermore, it was shown that
dolutegravir docked far less favourably (29/40) in a similar position to
the co-crystallized pose (Figure 2 g) relevant mechanistically for
strand-transfer inhibition. ^\ \ 4\ ,\ \ \ 16^ Taken together, docking
simulations point to compromised dolutegravir binding to integrase as a
potential source for emergent resistance. The fact that dolutegravir was
still able to bind with the 29th most favourable pose shows that
dolutegravir may retain low-level activity despite the presence of some
potentially relevant mutations.


## Discussion

Dolutegravir has been recently approved for treatment of HIV infection.
As a second-generation INI, it may be able to overcome many prior
raltegravir and elvitegravir failures. This has been demonstrated in
both *in vitro* studies and the VIKING-3 study, where dolutegravir was
evaluated in therapy-experienced adults harbouring INI-resistant
viruses. ^\ \ 4\ ,\ \ \ 8^ The VIKING-3 study showed that viruses with
resistance mutations at positions 155, 143 and mutants with T66I or E92Q
were more susceptible to dolutegravir than those with mutations at
position 148 (if associated with secondary mutations). ^\ \ 8^
Importantly, VIKING-3 subjects harbouring viruses with substitutions at
codon 66, 149 or 155 achieved viral suppression at week 24 in 100%, 75%
and 88% of patients, respectively. ^\ \ 8\ ,\ \ \ 17^ However, viral
suppression at week 24 was observed in only 59% and 24% of subjects when
the viral strains contained a substitution at codon 148 plus one and
more than two secondary mutations, respectively. Consequently,
dolutegravir has been recommended for salvage therapy in patients
resistant to raltegravir or elvitegravir that do not have integrase
mutations Q148H/K/R plus two or more secondary mutations.

In the present case, a switch from raltegravir to dolutegravir was
performed in February 2012 after the N155H mutation was first detected.
To determine whether prior resistance to raltegravir through N155H
affected dolutegravir activity, we performed retrospective phenotyping
of the virus from the time of switch for raltegravir, elvitegravir and
dolutegravir. As expected, this raltegravir-resistant virus was
susceptible to dolutegravir. Nevertheless, the dolutegravir activity
rapidly diminished, as phenotyping results for December 2012 showed a
fold change of 37. This phenotypic resistance was associated with the
acquisition of several integrase mutations in addition to the
persistence of N155H.

Among the natural polymorphisms identified, V31I, L101I, V201I and A265V
are part of 34 highly polymorphic sites in the integrase gene that have
been shown to have no effect on viral susceptibility to dolutegravir.
^\ \ 18^ In addition to the N155H mutation, other INI-resistance
mutations (T97A, S119R, E138K, S147G and V151I) emerged after
re-introduction of raltegravir (Table 3 ). V151I is a polymorphic
accessory INI-resistance mutation selected in raltegravir-treated
patients. E138K has been described to confer resistance to dolutegravir
and mainly occurs with Q148 mutations. ^\ \ 19^ S147G has been
frequently selected in patients receiving elvitegravir, with minimal
effects on raltegravir. ^\ \ 20^ T97A alone does not affect raltegravir
susceptibility, but has been shown to reduce raltegravir efficacy in
combination with Y143C/R. ^\ \ 21^ Interestingly, the addition of the
T97A and E138K to the other INI-resistance mutations mentioned above has
been observed to be accompanied by a dramatic decrease in viral
replicative capacity. Our findings show the acquisition of three
hitherto unreported new mutations consequent to dolutegravir treatment
failure: A49P, L68F (as a mixture with wild-type) and L234V. More
precisely, A49P and L234V were detected after 20 months of dolutegravir
therapy, and L68F/L slightly thereafter (23 months). The step-wise
acquisition of hitherto unreported integrase resistance mutations
suggests a novel dolutegravir resistance pathway rather than selection
of rare pre-existent minority species.

With the exception of the N155H substitution, all the accessory amino
acid substitutions observed during raltegravir treatment resulted from
G→A transitional mutations. In contrast, the previously noted
raltegravir-associated mutations T97A, E138K and S147G result from G→A
mutations while A49P and L234V represent G→C transversions. ^\ \ 22^ Two
major factors may affect the ability of a particular mutation to arise
following treatment failure: (i) the ease with which that mutation can
occur; and (ii) the selective advantage imparted by the phenotypic
expression of that mutation. Even without considering the APOBEC
proteins, ^\ \ 23^ transition mutations occur more frequently than
transversion mutations. Although the impact of a transition mutation on
double-stranded DNA structure is minor, the presence of a transversion
mutation usually implies a strong selective pressure ^\ \ 22^ \[such as
for N155H (A→C transversion)\], which confers high-level resistance to
raltegravir. In our case, two of five dolutegravir-associated
substitutions (A49P and L234V) resulted from G→C or C→G transversions,
implying strong selective pressure. It is known that major pathways of
selectively favourable mutations in HIV either increase or cause
resistance and/or recover activity losses caused by a previous
resistance substitution. Experiments are currently under way to
construct viruses carrying the A49P and/or L234V mutations by
site-directed mutagenesis and evaluate their susceptibility to
dolutegravir, raltegravir and elvitegravir and their effect on virus
replication capacity.

To further characterize these mutations, structural bioinformatics
analyses were performed. Two key changes were identified that may have
driven the virus to become resistant to dolutegravir: the A49P and L234V
mutations (Figure 2 ). These transversion mutations are within
interaction distance of each other (∼4 Å). The A49P substitution is
particularly interesting due to the known steric role of proline and the
ability of *cis* -- *trans* isomerization to drastically affect protein
structure. ^\ \ 24^ More precisely, this mutation is probably
responsible for the mis-positioning of the catalytic D64 residue, as
observed in Figure 2 (b and c). Indeed, if A49P along with the L234V
substitution caused a loss in integration, the impact on dolutegravir
binding might have outweighed the need of the virus to integrate; in our
binding simulations proper binding of dolutegravir was difficult to
achieve (Figure 2 e--g). Conversely, post-dolutegravir integrase may be
able to fold in a manner that facilitates altered target and viral DNA
binding, thereby allowing integration to proceed at a much lower, though
uninhibited, rate. To test this hypothesis, more models will need to be
tested and molecular dynamics studies performed.

In conclusion, our findings have shown a novel mutational pathway
involving A49P and L234V, leading to emergent dolutegravir resistance in
a patient on salvage therapy with the N155H mutation. INI salvage
therapy with dolutegravir should be used with caution in raltegravir
failures even if Q148 resistance mutations are not present.


## Funding

This work was supported by the Quebec HIV Genotyping Resistance Program,
The Réseau Sida et Maladies Infectieuses du Fond de Recherche du
Québec - Santé and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research to B. B.
and M. R.


## Transparency declarations

None to declare.


## Author contributions

M. R., I. H. and B. B. designed the experiments, analysed the data and
wrote the manuscript. I. H. and D. M. performed the genotyping
experiments. C. P. and W. H. performed the phenotyping experiments. P.
Q. and M. A. W. performed the modelling. R. T. was responsible for
patient recruitment and provided clinical and laboratory data. All
authors edited and approved the final version of the manuscript.


## Acknowledgements

We thank Simon Gagnon and Olga Golubkov for their help in performing the
genotype analyses. We also thank Maureen Oliviera for her involvement in
the cell culture experiments.


## Author notes

^†^

These authors contributed equally to this work.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

### Citations

35

CITATIONS

### Views

2,030

### Altmetric

More metrics information

### Email alerts

Article activity alert

Advance article alerts

New issue alert

Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic

### Recommended

1.  Pathway involving the N155H mutation in HIV-1 integrase leads to
dolutegravir resistance

Isabelle Malet et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 2018

2.  In vitro analysis of the replicative capacity and phenotypic
susceptibility to integrase inhibitors of HIV-2 mutants with
integrase insertions

Le Hingrat et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 2021

1.  Accumulation of integrase strand transfer inhibitor resistance
mutations confers high-level resistance to dolutegravir in non-B
subtype HIV-1 strains from patients failing raltegravir in Uganda

Emmanuel Ndashimye et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
2020

Powered by

### Citing articles via

Web of Science (29)

Google Scholar

-   ### Latest

-   ### Most Read

-   ### Most Cited

Professor Alasdair Macintosh Geddes, 14 May 1934--9 April 2024

Imipenem reduces the efficacy of vancomycin against *Elizabethkingia*
species

Implication of genotypes for prognosis of *Candida glabrata* bloodstream
infections

Characterization of a case of virological failure after switch to
long-acting cabotegravir and rilpivirine

The novel 2024 WHO *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* reference strains for global
quality assurance of laboratory investigations and superseded WHO *N.
gonorrhoeae* reference strains---phenotypic, genetic and reference
genome characterization

More from Oxford Academic

Clinical Medicine

Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics

Infectious Diseases

Medical Microbiology and Virology

Medicine and Health

Pathology

Books

Journals

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

close advertisement

-   About Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
-   Editorial Board
-   Author Guidelines
-   Contact BSAC
-   Facebook

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Twitter
-   Purchase
-   Recommend to your Library
-   Advertising and Corporate Services
-   Journals Career Network

-   Online ISSN 1460-2091
-   Print ISSN 0305-7453
-   Copyright © 2024 British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy

-   About Oxford Academic
-   Publish journals with us
-   University press partners
-   What we publish
-   New features

-   Authoring
-   Open access
-   Purchasing
-   Institutional account management
-   Rights and permissions

-   Get help with access
-   Accessibility
-   Contact us
-   Advertising
-   Media enquiries

-   Oxford University Press
-   News
-   Oxford Languages
-   University of Oxford

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It
furthers the University\'s objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide

-   Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press
-   Cookie settings
-   Cookie policy
-   Privacy policy
-   Legal notice

PDF Help
