# Combination of V106I and V179D Polymorphic Mutations in Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Reverse Transcriptase Confers Resistance to Efavirenz and Nevirapine but Not Etravirine ^▿^ ^†^

Hiroyuki Gatanaga , ^1,^ ^2,^ ^\*^ Hirotaka Ode , ^4^ Atsuko Hachiya ,
^1,^ ^3^ Tsunefusa Hayashida , ^1,^ ^2^ Hironori Sato , ^4^ and Shinichi
Oka ^1,^ ^2^

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer


## Associated Data

Supplementary Materials

:



## Abstract

Etravirine (ETV) is a second-generation nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase (RT) inhibitor (NNRTI) introduced recently for salvage
antiretroviral treatment after the emergence of NNRTI-resistant human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). Following its introduction, two
naturally occurring mutations in HIV-1 RT, V106I and V179D, were listed
as ETV resistance-associated mutations. However, the effect of these
mutations on the development of NNRTI resistance has not been analyzed
yet. To select highly NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 *in vitro* , monoclonal
HIV-1 strains harboring V106I and V179D (HIV-1 ~V106I~ and HIV-1 ~V179D~
) were propagated in the presence of increasing concentrations of
efavirenz (EFV). Interestingly, V179D emerged in one of three selection
experiments from HIV-1 ~V106I~ and V106I emerged in two of three
experiments from HIV-1 ~V179D~ . Analysis of recombinant HIV-1 clones
showed that the combination of V106I and V179D conferred significant
resistance to EFV and nevirapine (NVP) but not to ETV. Structural
analysis indicated that ETV can overcome the repulsive interactions
caused by the combination of V106I and V179D through fine-tuning of its
binding module to RT facilitated by its plastic structure, whereas EFV
and NVP cannot because of their rigid structures. Analysis of clinical
isolates showed comparable drug susceptibilities, and the same
combination of mutations was found in some database patients who
experienced virologic NNRTI-based treatment failure. The combination of
V106I and V179D is a newly identified NNRTI resistance pattern of
mutations. The combination of polymorphic and minor
resistance-associated mutations should be interpreted carefully.


##

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) sequences differ among
infected individuals, and there are a number of naturally occurring
amino acid changes commonly found in treatment-naïve patients ( 3 , 23 ,
28 ). These polymorphic changes can occur even in genes that encode drug
target proteins, and in fact, some drug resistance-associated mutations
in protease genes are often present in treatment-naïve individuals,
especially in non-subtype B clade-infected individuals ( 13 , 15 , 22 ).
Minor resistance mutations, which are considered to compensate for the
impaired replication fitness of viruses containing major resistance
mutations, do not have a substantial effect on the viral phenotype by
themselves ( 14 , 27 ). In the reverse transcriptase (RT) coding region,
drug resistance-associated mutations were detected at a low frequency in
treatment-naïve individuals regardless of the HIV-1 clade. However,
etravirine (ETV), a second-generation nonnucleoside RT inhibitor
(NNRTI), has been available in the clinical setting and the following
have been listed as ETV resistance-associated mutations in RT: V90I,
A98G, L100I, K101E/H/P, V106I, E138A, V179D/F/T, Y181C/I/V, G190S/A, and
M230L ( 14 ). V106I and V179D are often found in treatment-naïve
individuals but are considered to have no substantial impact on
NNRTI-containing treatment by themselves. ETV exhibits activity against
many viruses that are resistant to first-line NNRTIs, including
efavirenz (EFV) and nevirapine (NVP), and shows clinical efficacy in
salvage treatment after NNRTI treatment failure ( 18 , 21 ). However, it
is possible that EFV- and NVP-resistant viruses derived from HIV-1
harboring V106I or V179D could compromise the efficacy of ETV. To
determine the impact of these polymorphic mutations on the mutation
patterns of NNRTI resistance, EFV-resistant HIV-1 strains were selected
*in vitro* from monoclonal viruses harboring V106I and V179D,
respectively. The virologic effects of selected specific mutation
patterns were analyzed by constructing recombinant HIV-1 clones, and
their clinical relevance was confirmed by analysis of isolates from
infected individuals.



## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### HIV-1 sequences and clinical isolates from treatment-naïve individuals.

HIV-1 RT sequences were analyzed in 364 antiretroviral treatment-naïve
infected individuals who visited the outpatient clinic of the AIDS
Clinical Center, International Medical Center of Japan, in 2007 and 2008
and gave written informed consent to this study. Viral RNA was extracted
from stocked plasma samples, and the HIV-1 RT coding region was
amplified by RT-PCR and nested PCR using previously published primer
pairs ( 7 , 10 , 11 ). Direct sequencing was performed using dye
terminators, and the HIV-1 subtypes of the sequences obtained were
determined by the neighbor-joining method. Clinical HIV-1 isolates were
obtained using MAGIC-5 cells (CCR5- and CD4-expressing HeLa-LTR-β-D-gal
cells) from fresh plasma samples collected from seven of the
above-mentioned treatment-naïve patients and stored at −80°C until use (
9 ).

### Generation of recombinant HIV-1 strains.

The desired mutations were introduced into the XmaI-NheI region of
pTZNX, which encodes Gly-15 to Ala-267 of HIV-1 RT (strain BH 10), by
the oligonucleotide-based mutagenesis method ( 10 , 16 ). The XmaI-NheI
fragment was inserted into pNL ~H219Q~ , which was modified from pNL101
and encoded the full genome of HIV-1 strain BH 10. pNL ~H219Q~ harbors
the H219Q mutation in the HIV-1 Gag region, which facilitated HIV-1
replication in MT-2 and H9 cells ( 6 , 8 ). HIV-1 derived from pNL
~H219Q~ was used as the wild type. Determination of the nucleotide
sequences of the plasmids confirmed that each clone had the desired
mutations but was devoid of unintended mutations. Each molecular clone
was transfected into COS-7 cells with the GenePORTER Transfection
Reagent (Gene Therapy Systems, San Diego, CA), and the virions obtained
were harvested 48 h after transfection and stored at −80°C until use.

### Selection of EFV-resistant HIV-1.

The infectious HIV-1 clones harboring the V106I (HIV-1 ~V106I~ ) and
V179D (HIV-1 ~V179D~ ) mutations in their RTs were propagated in MT-2
cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of EFV ( 7 , 8 , 31
). Briefly, MT-2 cells (1 × 10 ^5^ ) were exposed to 500
blue-cell-forming units (BFU) in MAGIC-5 cells containing HIV-1 ~V106I~
and HIV-1 ~V179D~ and cultured in the presence of EFV at an initial
concentration of 3 nM. Viral replication was monitored by observation of
the cytopathic effect in MT-2 cells. The culture supernatant was
harvested on day 7 of culture and used to infect fresh MT-2 cells for
the next round of culture. When the virus began to propagate in the
presence of the drug, the drug concentration was increased by
0.5-log-fold. This selection was carried out for a total of 14 passages.
The proviral HIV-1 RT coding region in infected MT-2 cells was amplified
and sequenced at several passages.

### Drug susceptibility assay.

EFV, NVP, and ETV were generously provided by Merck Co., Inc. (Rahway,
NJ), Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceutics Inc. (Ridgefield, CT), and
Tibotec Pharmaceuticals (Little Island, Co., Cork, Ireland),
respectively. Recombinant and isolated HIV-1 susceptibility to EFV, NVP,
and ETV was determined in triplicate using MAGIC-5 cells ( 10 , 12 , 16
). Briefly, MAGIC-5 cells were infected with an adjusted virus stock
(300 BFU) in various concentrations of NNRTIs, cultured for 48 h, fixed,
and stained with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β- d -galactopyranoside
(Takara Shuzo, Ohtsu, Japan). The blue-stained cells were counted under
a light microscope. The drug concentrations that inhibited 50% of the
stained cells of a drug-free control (EC ~50~ s) were determined by
referring to the dose-response curve. The drug susceptibility assay was
performed in triplicate and repeated three times. Fold resistance was
calculated by comparing the viral EC ~50~ with that of monoclonal
wild-type HIV-1 (HIV-1 ~WT~ ). Drug resistance was judged significant
when it was higher than threefold.

### Viral replication kinetics assay.

MT-2 cells (1 × 10 ^5^ ) were exposed to each infectious virus
preparation (500 BFU) for 2 h, washed twice with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS), and cultured in the presence or absence of 10 nM EFV, 100
nM NVP, or 10 nM ETV. The culture supernatants were harvested every
other day, and p24 Gag amounts were determined with a chemiluminescence
enzyme immunoassay kit (Fuji-Rebio, Tokyo, Japan). Replication assays
were performed in triplicate and repeated three times using
independently generated virus preparations ( 7 ).

### Competitive HIV-1 replication assay.

Freshly prepared H9 cells (3 × 10 ^5^ ) were exposed to mixtures of
paired virus preparations (300 BFU each) to be examined for their
replication ability for 2 h, washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS), and cultured in the absence or presence of 10 nM EFV or 100 nM
NVP as described previously ( 7 , 17 ). On day 1, one-third of the
infected H9 cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS, and proviral
DNAs were sequenced (0 week). Every 7 days, the supernatant of the virus
culture was transferred to new uninfected H9 cells; the cells harvested
at the end of each passage were subjected to direct DNA sequencing of
the HIV-1 RT coding region, and the change in the viral population was
determined by the relative peak height on the sequencing electrogram.
The persistence of the original amino acid substitution was confirmed at
the end of the assay.

### Structure modeling.

We constructed 18 structural models of the HIV-1 RT and NNRTI complex by
computational analysis. First, we constructed the initial models of
wild-type RT with one of three NNRTIs by homology modeling using
Molecular Operating Environment 2007.09.02 (Chemical Computing Group,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada). The crystal structures of RT with NNRTIs
(Protein Data Bank codes 1IKW \[ 20 \], 1VRT \[ 26 \], and 1SV5 \[ 4 \])
were used as template structures. The homology modeling enabled the
building of missing atoms in template structures. The ff94 force field
and distance-dependent electrostatic energy function were applied in the
modeling. Next, we refined the initial models by energy minimization
using the sander module of the AMBER9 software package in two steps. In
the first step, energies for the NNRTIs in the complex models were
minimized in the gas phase by the conjugated gradient method. When the
energy was not converged until 10,000 steps, this step was ignored. In
the second step, energies of whole structures were converged up to 0.5
kcal/mol/Å by 50 steps of the steepest-descent method and the subsequent
conjugated gradient method under implicit water solvent conditions. In
each minimization, the AMBER ff03 ( 5 , 19 ), the general AMBER force
field ( 30 ), and the generalized Born implicit solvent surface area
method (IGB = 2) ( 24 ) were applied for potential energy calculations.
The cutoff for long-distance interaction energy was set at 15.0 Å. The
charge and type of every atom in NNRTIs were automatically assigned
using the AMBER9 Antechamber module. We also constructed five mutant RTs
with the NNRTIs by considering every possible conformer of the
respective mutant models. The possible conformers were generated from
the wild-type homology models using PyMOL ver. 0.99rc6 (
http://www.pymol.org ). V106A, V106I, and V179D mutants had one, three
to five, and five possible conformers, respectively. The structural
model of each conformer was refined by a method similar to that used in
the wild-type models. Among the refined conformers, we selected the
conformer with the lowest energy as each mutant model.



## RESULTS

### Frequencies of NNRTI resistance mutations in treatment-naïve individuals.

To determine the frequency of NNRTI resistance-associated mutations, the
HIV-1 RT coding region was analyzed and the viral subtype was determined
in 364 treatment-naïve infected individuals. The most frequent subtype
was clade B ( *n* = 334; 91.8%), followed by clade AE ( *n* = 20; 5.5%).
Clades C and G were also found and at similar low frequencies ( *n* = 5;
1.4%). Variable amino acid substitutions were identified at the
positions of NNRTI resistance-associated mutations, including the 90th,
98th, 101st, 103rd, 106th, 108th, 138th, and 179th, though only the
wild-type amino acids were observed at the 100th, 181st, 188th, 190th,
225th, and 230th positions of HIV-1 RT (Table ​ (Table1). 1 ). K103N and
V108I are listed as EFV and NVP resistance-associated mutations and
V90I, K101E, V106I, E138A, V179D, and V179T are listed as ETV
resistance-associated mutations in the Drug Resistance Mutation List of
the International AIDS Society (IAS)-USA ( 14 ). Of these NNRTI
resistance-associated mutations, V106I (2.5%) and V179D (5.8%) were
frequently observed in treatment-naïve patients, while the other six
mutations were less common (0.3 to 0.8%). These data indicate that V106I
and V179D occur naturally in treatment-naïve individuals at significant
frequencies and are clinically important as polymorphic mutations.
Accordingly, we focused on these two polymorphic mutations and analyzed
their effects on the development of NNRTI resistance. There was no overt
linkage among the amino acids at the positions of NNRTI
resistance-associated mutations, though one patient harbored both V106I
and V179D without any other resistance-associated mutations. There was
no correlation between clades and the 106th and 179th amino acids.

### TABLE 1.

Frequencies of amino acids at positions associated with NNRTI resistance
mutations in HIV-1 RT in treatment-naïve patients

Position

Amino acid, frequency \[ *n* (%)/364\] ^*a*^

90

V, 361 (99.2)

I, 3 (0.8)

98

A, 344 (94.5)

S, 20 (5.5)

101

K, 352 (96.7)

Q, 8 (2.2)

R, 3 (0.8)

E, 1 (0.3)

103

K, 353 (97.0)

R, 7 (1.9)

N, 2 (0.5)

Q, 2 (0.5)

106

V, 355 (97.5)

I, 9 ^*b*^ (2.5)

108

V, 362 (99.5)

I, 2 (0.5)

138

E, 361 (99.2)

K, 1 (0.3)

A, 1 (0.3)

G, 1 (0.3)

179

V, 312 (85.7)

D, 21 ^*c*^ (5.8)

I, 21 (5.8)

E, 4 (1.1)

A, 4 (1.1)

T, 1 (0.3)

N, 1 (0.3)

Open in a separate window

^a^ Only wild-type amino acids (L, Y, Y, G, P, and M, respectively) were
identified at the 100th, 181st, 188th, 190th, 225th, and 230th positions
of HIV-1 RT.

^b^ Including two cases with V90/A98/K101Q/K103/V106I/V108/E138/V179,
two cases with V90/A98/K101/K103/V106I/V108/E138/V179I, one case with
V90/A98/K101/K103/V106I/V108/E138/V179D, and four cases with
V90/A98/K101/K103/V106I/V108/E138/V179.

^c^ Including 2 cases with V90/A98S/K101/K103/V106/V108/E138/V179D, 1
case with V90/A98/K101E/K103R/V106/V108/E138/V179D, 1 case with
V90/A98/K101/K103R/V106/V108/E138/V179D, 1 case with
V90/A98/K101/K103/V106I/V108/E138/V179D, and 16 cases with
V90/A98/K101/K103/V106/V108/E138/V179D.

### Selection of EFV-resistant HIV-1 from HIV-1 ~V106I~ and HIV-1 ~V179D~ .

To analyze the effects of V106I and V179D on the resistance pattern of
mutations, EFV-resistant HIV-1 strains were selected from monoclonal
HIV-1 strains harboring V106I (HIV-1 ~V106I~ ) or V179D (HIV-1 ~V179D~
). These selection experiments were performed independently in
triplicate. Interestingly, in one of three selection experiments with
HIV-1 ~V106I~ , V179D emerged when the EFV concentration reached 100 nM,
and it was persistently identified until the end of the passages without
additional mutations (Fig. ​ (Fig.1A). 1A ). In two other experiments
with HIV-1 ~V106I~ , I106M emerged, followed by Y188C, and L100I
emerged, followed by Y181C. These four mutations are already known NNRTI
resistance-associated mutations (Fig. 1B and C ) ( 1 , 14 , 25 ). In one
of three experiments with HIV-1 ~V179D~ , V106I emerged when the EFV
concentration reached 100 nM, and L100I further emerged at the end of
the experiments (Fig. ​ (Fig.1D). 1D ). In another experiment, V106I
emerged when the EFV concentration was 100 nM, and E122G and M230L
followed subsequently (Fig. ​ (Fig.1E). 1E ). In the last experiment,
L100I emerged when the EFV concentration reached 100 nM, and it remained
until the end of the passages without additional mutations (Fig. ​
(Fig.1F). 1F ). In summary, selected by EFV, V179D emerged in one of
three experiments from HIV-1 ~V106I~ and V106I emerged in two of three
experiments from HIV-1 ~V179D~ , suggesting that the combination of two
polymorphic mutations, V106I and V179D, alters viral susceptibility to
EFV.

FIG. 1.

Selected amino acid substitutions under selective pressure from EFV.
HIV-1 ~V106I~ (A to C) and HIV-1 ~V179D~ (D to F) were propagated in
MT-2 cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of EFV. The
selected amino acid substitutions were analyzed at several passages by
sequencing the proviral HIV-1 RT coding region in MT-2 cells. Amino acid
substitutions compared with wild-type strain BH 10 are shown.

### NNRTI susceptibility of recombinant HIV-1 strains.

To analyze the effects of V106I, V179D, and their combination on NNRTI
susceptibility, a panel of recombinant HIV-1 clones was constructed and
their EFV, NVP, and ETV EC ~50~ s were determined. As expected, the
single mutation V106I or V179D did not confer significant resistance to
EFV and NVP (Table ​ (Table2). 2 ). HIV-1 ~V106A~ was generated as a
reference, and it showed high-fold resistance to NVP but not to EFV, in
agreement with previous studies ( 10 , 14 ). The addition of V179D to
HIV-1 ~V106A~ (HIV-1 ~V106A/V179D~ ) increased its resistance to NVP and
conferred significant resistance to EFV. The combination of the two
polymorphic mutations, V106I and V179D, which emerged in resistance
selection experiments with EFV, conferred significant resistance not
only to EFV but also to NVP. In the susceptibility assay with ETV, it
exhibited potent anti-HIV-1 activity in all of the HIV-1 strains
examined, including the NNRTI-resistant clones described above,
indicating that ETV has a different binding formulation with RT
molecules than EFV and NVP do.

### TABLE 2.

NNRTI susceptibility of recombinant HIV-1 strains

HIV-1 strain

Mean EC ~50~ (μM) ±SD (fold resistance) ^*a*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

EFV

NVP

ETV

Wild type

0.002 ± 0.0007

0.05 ± 0.01

0.0012 ± 0

V106A clone

0.003 ± 0.0009 (1.5)

3.43 ± 0.98 (69)

0.0005 ± 0.0001 (0.40)

V106I clone

0.003 ± 0.0003 (1.5)

0.02 ± 0.0012 (0.40)

0.0015 ± 0.0004 (1.3)

V179D clone

0.004 ± 0.0002 (2.0)

0.13 ± 0.02 (2.6)

0.0019 ± 0.0004 (1.6)

V106A V179D clone

0.013 ± 0.004 (6.5)

4.53 ± 0.72 (91)

0.0014 ± 0.0004 (1.2)

V106I V179D clone

0.029 ± 0.007 (15)

0.37 ± 0.12 (7.0)

0.0024 ± 0.0004 (2.0)

Open in a separate window

^a^ The drug susceptibility assay was performed in triplicate and
repeated three times (nine experiments). Data are means of nine
experiments.

### Replication kinetics of recombinant HIV-1 strains.

To analyze the effects of single mutations and their combinations on
HIV-1 replication efficiency, we assayed the replication kinetics of
recombinant HIV-1 strains in MT-2 cells in the absence or presence of an
NNRTI. Each replication assay was performed in triplicate and repeated
three times. In the absence of an NNRTI, V106I did not alter HIV-1 ~WT~
replication while V179D significantly reduced HIV-1 ~WT~ replication
(p24 of HIV-1 ~V179D~ versus HIV-1 ~WT~ on day 8; *P* \< 0.05) (Fig. ​
(Fig.2A). 2A ). The addition of V106I to HIV-1 ~V179D~ (HIV-1
~V106I/179D~ ) did not significantly alter its replication kinetics.
V106A significantly reduced viral replication (p24 of HIV-1 ~V106A~
versus HIV-1 ~WT~ on day 8; *P* \< 0.01), and the addition of V179D to
it (HIV-1 ~V106A/179D~ ) further reduced the virus\'s replication
ability (p24 of HIV-1 ~V106A/V179D~ versus HIV-1 ~V106A~ on day 8; *P*
\< 0.05).

FIG. 2.

Replication kinetics of recombinant HIV-1 clones in the absence and
presence of NNRTIs. Recombinant HIV-1 clones were propagated in MT-2
cells in the absence (A) and presence of 10 nM EFV (B), 100 nM NVP (C),
or 10 nM ETV (D). The concentration of p24 in the culture medium was
measured every other day. The assay was performed in triplicate and
repeated three times (nine experiments). The data are logarithmic mean
p24 concentrations ± standard deviations (days 6 and 8 in panels A to
C).

In the presence of 10 nM EFV, HIV-1 ~WT~ , HIV-1 ~V106I~ , and HIV-1
~V106A~ failed to propagate and HIV-1 ~V179D~ exhibited reduced
replication compared with that observed in the absence of an NNRTI ( *P*
\< 0.01) (Fig. ​ (Fig.2B). 2B ). HIV-1 ~V106I/V179D~ and HIV-1
~V106A/V179D~ showed efficient replication, though the replication of
HIV-1 ~V106A/V179D~ was slightly reduced compared with that observed in
the absence of an NNRTI. In the presence of 100 nM NVP, HIV-1 ~WT~ and
HIV-1 ~V106I~ failed to propagate and HIV-1 ~V179D~ exhibited reduced
replication compared with that observed in the absence of an NNRTI ( *P*
\< 0.01) (Fig. ​ (Fig.2C). 2C ). HIV-1 ~V106A~ and HIV-1 ~V106I/V179D~
showed efficient replication, though the replication of HIV-1
~V106I/V179D~ was reduced significantly compared with that observed in
the absence of an NNRTI ( *P* \< 0.05). HIV-1 ~V106A/V179D~ exhibited
replication comparable to that observed in the absence of an NNRTI. In
the presence of 10 nM ETV, all of the HIV-1 strains examined exhibited
severely compromised replication (Fig. ​ (Fig.2D). 2D ). The results of
the replication kinetics experiments were in agreement with the drug
susceptibility data.

To analyze the precise roles of V106I and V179D in HIV-1 ~V106I/V179D~ ,
a competitive HIV-1 replication assay was performed using H9 cells ( 7 ,
17 ). The assay of HIV-1 ~V106I~ and HIV-1 ~V106I/V179D~ indicated that
the addition of V179D compromised the replication fitness of HIV-1
~V106I~ but conferred resistance to EFV and NVP (see Fig. S1A to C in
the supplemental material). The assay of HIV-1 ~V179D~ and HIV-1
~V106I/V179D~ indicated that the addition of V106I slightly reduced the
replication ability of HIV-1 ~V179D~ but conferred resistance to EFV and
NVP (see Fig. S1D to F in the supplemental material). In the presence of
10 nM ETV, the HIV-1 clones examined could not be passaged efficiently
because ETV efficiently suppressed viral replication.

### NNRTI susceptibility of HIV-1 clinical isolates.

Analysis of the recombinant HIV-1 clones indicated that the combination
of V106I and V179D conferred significant resistance to EFV and NVP but
not to ETV, although each single mutation did not alter viral
susceptibility to NNRTIs (Table ​ (Table2). 2 ). To determine the
clinical relevance of the results of recombinant HIV-1 analysis, HIV-1
clinical isolates were obtained using MAGIC-5 cells from seven
treatment-naïve individuals (cases 1 to 7). In cases 1 and 2, only
wild-type amino acids (valine) were detected at the 106th and 179th
codons of the HIV-1 RT coding region. In cases 3 and 4, V106I was
detected and wild-type valine was found at the 179th codon. In cases 5
and 6, wild-type valine was found at the 106th codon and V179D was
identified. In case 7, both V106I and V179D were identified, and none of
the other patients harbored both mutations in HIV-1 RT. Subclonal
analysis determined that V106I and V179D were on the same virus and that
they were highly dominant in case 7 (Table ​ (Table1). 1 ). All seven of
the patients were infected with HIV-1 subtype B, and no other known
resistance-associated mutations were detected at any RT codon other than
the 106th and 179th. The six isolates derived from cases 1 to 6 did not
show significant resistance to NNRTIs (Table ​ (Table3). 3 ). The isolate
from case 7, however, exhibited significant resistance to EFV and NVP
but not to ETV. These data confirmed the results obtained by recombinant
HIV-1 analysis.

### TABLE 3.

NNRTI susceptibility of clinical HIV-1 isolates

HIV-1 strain (case no.)

Mean EC ~50~ (μM) ±SD (fold resistance) ^*a*^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

EFV

NVP

ETV

Wild type (V106 V179)

0.002 ± 0.0001

0.05 ± 0.004

0.0013 ± 0.0001

V106 V179 isolate (1)

0.002 ± 0.0004 (1.0)

0.04 ± 0.004 (0.8)

0.002 ± 0.0004 (1.5)

V106 V179 isolate (2)

0.002 ± 0.0003 (1.0)

0.04 ± 0.004 (0.8)

0.003 ± 0.0002 (2.3)

V106I V179 isolate (3)

0.002 ± 0.0002 (1.0)

0.03 ± 0.01 (0.6)

0.0012 ± 0.0002 (0.9)

V106I V179 isolate (4)

0.004 ± 0.001 (2.0)

0.09 ± 0.01 (1.8)

0.0024 ± 0.0002 (1.8)

V106 V179D isolate (5)

0.006 ± 0.001 (3.0)

0.07 ± 0.02 (1.4)

0.0015 ± 0.0002 (1.2)

V106 V179D isolate (6)

0.004 ± 0.002 (2.0)

0.07 ± 0.004 (1.4)

0.0011 ± 0.0001 (0.8)

V106I V179D isolate (7)

0.01 ± 0.001 (7.0)

0.19 ± 0.02 (3.8)

0.002 ± 0.0003 (1.5)

Open in a separate window

^a^ The drug susceptibility assay was performed in triplicate and
repeated three times (nine experiments). Data are means of nine
experiments.

### Structural modeling analysis.

To obtain structural insight into the molecular mechanisms through which
RT mutations alter susceptibility to NNRTIs, we conducted structural
analyses by computational methods. A total of 18 structural models of
RT-NNRTI complexes were constructed with six RTs (wild-type RT and
V179D, V106A, V106I, V106A/V179D, and V106I/V179D mutant RTs) and three
NNRTIs (EFV, NVP, and ETV), and the differences in binding energy
between the mutant and wild-type complexes (ΔΔ *G ~b~* ) were
calculated. Notably, ΔΔ *G ~b~* was proportionally related to the
logarithm of fold resistance in RT (Table ​ (Table2); 2 ); i.e., the ΔΔ
*G ~b~* values for each RT-NNRTI set were well compatible with the *in
vitro* resistance data described above, suggesting that our modeling
appropriately reflects the actual mode of binding between the RT
molecule and the NNRTI.

In these models, EFV and NVP were predicted to bind to the hydrophobic
pocket of RT, as demonstrated in the crystal structures ( 20 , 26 ). In
the wild-type RT, V106 and V179 contributed to the stabilization of the
binding of EFV and NVP through hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 3A and C
). However, the V106I and V179D mutations attenuated this stabilization
by the following mechanisms. In the case of EFV, the V106I mutation
caused a steric clash with the chlorine atom on one side of EFV and the
V179D mutation caused electrostatic repulsion on the other side of EFV
between the carbonyl oxygen atom of EFV and the carboxyl oxygen atoms of
D179 in RT (Fig. ​ (Fig.3B). 3B ). In the case of NVP, the V106I mutation
caused a steric clash with the aromatic ring of NVP, whereas the V179D
mutation reduced hydrophobic contacts with NVP and the charged carboxyl
atoms of D179 showed unfavorable contacts with the hydrophobic
three-member ring of NVP (Fig. ​ (Fig.3D). 3D ). The effect of a single
mutation on binding affinity was relatively moderate because a slight
positional shift in EFV and NVP reduced unfavorable contacts. However,
V106I V179D double mutations coincidentally caused repulsive
interactions at the distinct sites of EFV and NVP which significantly
attenuated the affinity of EFV and NVP for RT (Fig. 3B and D ).

FIG. 3.

Interactions of NNRTIs with the 106th and 179th residues of RTs.
Interaction sites of NNRTIs and RTs in the models are shown. (A)
Wild-type RT (RT ~WT~ ) with EFV. (B) RT ~V106I/V179D~ with EFV. (C) RT
~WT~ with NVP. (D) RT ~V106I/V179D~ with NVP. (E) RT ~WT~ with ETV. (F)
RT ~V106I/V179D~ with ETV. In the RT ~WT~ and RT ~V106I/V179D~ models,
carbon atoms appear gray and cyan, respectively. NNRTIs and the 106th
and 179th residues are highlighted by the stick configuration. Blue
sticks, nitrogen; red sticks, oxygen; light blue, fluorine; light green,
chlorine; pink sticks, bromine atoms.

ETV has rotatable bonds that link aromatic rings. Therefore, it is
conceivable that conformational plasticity allowed fine-tuning of ETV
conformations for stable binding (Fig. 3E and F ). In fact,
superposition of the structural models of ETV-RT complexes showed that
ETV changed its conformation and position depending on the mutations
(Fig. ​ (Fig.4A). 4A ). In contrast, the conformations of EFV and NVP
were more rigid due to a lack of rotatable bonds. Therefore, the
conformations of EFV and NVP remained similar with various mutant RTs
(Fig. 4B and C ). These results suggest that the plasticity of the
conformation of ETV plays a key role in maintaining its binding affinity
for various mutant RTs, as reported in the crystal structural study ( 4
).

FIG. 4.

Superposition of RT ~WT~ and five mutant models. (A) RTs with ETV. (B)
RTs with EFV. (C) RTs with NVP. NNRTIs and the 106th and 179th residues
are highlighted by the stick configuration. White sticks, RT ~WT~ ;
yellow, RT ~V106A~ ; green, RT ~V106I~ ; orange, RT ~V179D~ ; purple, RT
~V106A/V179D~ ; cyan, RT ~V106I/V179D~ .



## DISCUSSION

The results of the present study indicated that the combination of two
polymorphic mutations, V106I and V179D, alters the susceptibility of
HIV-1 to EFV, as demonstrated in the resistance selection experiments
(Fig. ​ (Fig.1). 1 ). Analysis of the recombinant monoclonal HIV-1
strains revealed that the combination confers significant resistance to
EFV and NVP but not to ETV, although each mutation alone could not alter
NNRTI susceptibility (Table ​ (Table2). 2 ). Furthermore, one clinical
HIV-1 isolate from a treatment-naïve patient who harbored V106I and
V179D without any other resistance-associated mutation showed
significant resistance to EFV and NVP but not to ETV (Table ​ (Table3). 3
). In a previous study, Tee et al. ( 29 ) analyzed HIV-1 RT and protease
sequences in 36 antiretroviral-treated patients with detectable viral
loads but they could not find any known resistance-associated mutation
in 8 patients. In one of their patients on EFV treatment (04MYKL1665),
V106I and V179D coexisted in the HIV-1 RT according to GenBank
(accession no. AY960901 ; accessed in October 2009). In a clinical trial
of tipranavir, the HIV-1 isolate from one patient (case 48-1084), who
experienced NNRTI-treatment failure, harbored V106I and V179D without
any other NNRTI resistance-associated mutations ( DQ880530 ) ( 2 ).
These data strongly indicate that the combination of V106I and V179D
also confers significant resistance to NNRTIs *in vivo* .

Structural modeling indicated that V106I and V179D cooperatively reduce
NNRTI binding to EFV and NVP. ETV, however, exhibits structural
plasticity and can avoid any disturbance caused by the combination of
V106I and V179D. This specific structure probably contributes to the
efficacy of ETV against many NNRTI-resistant HIV-1 strains, resulting in
an excellent rate of response to ETV-containing salvage treatment ( 18 ,
21 ).

Both V106I and V179D are listed as minor ETV resistance-associated
mutations in the current version of the IAS-USA Drug Resistance Mutation
List ( 14 ), but both are not recognized as EFV and NVP
resistance-associated mutations. They are often identified individually
but rarely coexist in treatment-naïve individuals (Table ​ (Table1). 1 ).
The combination of V106I and V179D, however, can be found in patients
whose baseline HIV-1 held either V106I or V179D after failure of EFV- or
NVP-containing treatment ( 2 , 29 ). Considering that either V106I or
V179D was identified in a significant portion of treatment-naïve
patients (29/364; 8%) (Table ​ (Table1), 1 ), the above information on
NNRTI resistance caused by the mutation combination should be recognized
by all clinical specialists involved in the interpretation of genotype
drug resistance tests and those physicians responsible for changing
antiretroviral treatment regimens. In a previous study, we selected
EFV-resistant HIV-1 by culture of monoclonal HIV-1 harboring another
common polymorphic mutation, K103R (HIV-1 ~K103R~ ), and found the
additional emergence of V179D; we then confirmed that the combination of
K103R and V179D conferred significant resistance to EFV and NVP ( 7 ).
Considering these findings together, one assumes that the combinations
of polymorphic mutations can reduce NNRTI susceptibility and that other
combinations of polymorphic mutations can confer NNRTI resistance.
Furthermore, mutations found to be important for one drug may actually
have a greater effect on other drugs of the same class. Even polymorphic
and minor resistance mutations should be considered carefully when
interpreting the results of genotype testing.



## Supplementary Material

**\[Supplemental material\]**

Click here to view.



## Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for AIDS Research from
the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare (H20-AIDS-002) and the Global
Center of Excellence Program (Global Education and Research Center
Aiming at the Control of AIDS) from the Ministry of Education, Science,
Sports and Culture of Japan.



## Footnotes

^▿^ Published ahead of print on 1 February 2010.

^†^ Supplemental material for this article may be found at
http://aac.asm.org/ .



