# Distinct Circulating Recombinant HIV-1 Strains Among Injecting Drug Users and Sex Workers in Afghanistan


## Abstract

Little information is available regarding a circulating HIV genotype among high-risk groups in Afghanistan; we describe HIV genotypes among injecting drug users (IDUs) and sex workers (SWs) in four Afghan cities. Participants completed behavioral questionnaires and HIV testing. Western blot--confirmed specimens had peripheral mononuclear blood cells isolated for genotyping. Analysis of recombinants was done by bootscanning and manual sequence alignment. The single SW sample harbored a CRF01_AE strain. Of 10 IDUs available for analysis, all were CRF35_AD and from Hirat. Analyzed subregions ( gag p17 and env C1-C5) revealed close homology between the Hirat specimens. Three distinct subclusters comprising two or three strains were identified, whereas two other strains were generally equidistant from previously identified Kabul strains. Results suggest that the nascent HIV epidemic among IDUs in Hirat is largely, if not entirely, subtype CRF35_AD, and the close homology suggests recent infection; harm reduction should be supported to avert further transmission.



## Introduction

HIV epidemics driven by injecting drug use are emerging in multiple
cities in Iran and Pakistan. ^1\ ,\ 2^ Assessment of HIV-1 genotype
among injecting drug users (IDUs) performed in both countries has
identified a predominance of subtype A strains, with subtype B strains
identified in Iran among patients infected through blood transfusion.
^3\ --\ 5^ Behavioral assessments of these high-risk populations in
multiple settings have identified a strong potential for bridging of the
HIV epidemic from IDUs to other groups, chiefly sex workers (SWs).
^1\ ,\ 6\ --\ 8^

HIV genotype information may be useful to describe transmission linkages
between risk groups. In analyzing HIV-1 strains from IDUs in Iran,
Tagliamonte *et al* . ^5^ identified greater homology within the
isolated subtypes from Tehran than those from Mashad, providing some
objective insight into the duration of the respective epidemics in the
two cities and interactions between their IDU networks.

Afghanistan shares borders with Pakistan and Iran and has had a
substantial influx of repatriating refugees from those countries in the
last 7 years. Afghanistan is also the leading global producer of opium
and has experienced burgeoning problem drug use, including transitions
from noninjecting to injecting of opiates and pharmaceuticals. ^9^ The
interplay between IDUs and other vulnerable populations may lead to
spread of HIV in ways distinct from those of neighboring countries. A
nascent HIV epidemic among IDUs in Kabul has been reported, with genetic
analysis of four samples identifying the unique recombinant CRF35_AD.
^10^ However, few data are available regarding other risk groups or IDUs
in other areas of Afghanistan, a country with diverse populations. As a
part of this study, HIV seroprevalence and high-risk behaviors of IDUs
and SWs were assessed in three additional Afghan cities, with genetic
analysis of confirmed HIV specimens. Herein, we present and characterize
sequenced HIV-1 genotypes from high risk groups in the cities of Hirat,
Jalalabad, Kabul, and Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan.

This cross-sectional study conducted between September 2006 and January
2008 surveyed SWs from Kabul, Jalalabad, and Mazar-i-Sharif, and IDUs in
Jalalabad, Mazar-i-Sharif, and Hirat. All cities have functioning
Ministry of Public Health Voluntary Counseling and Testing Centers
(VCTs) and groups working with either or both of the high-risk
populations of interest. Before data collection, this study was approved
by the institutional review boards of the University of California, San
Diego; the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research; the U.S. Naval
Medical Research Unit 3 in Cairo, Egypt; and the Ministry of Public
Health of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

Eligible participants were individuals aged 18 years or older reporting
injecting drugs (confirmed through injection stigmata) or sex work
within the past 6 months and able to provide informed consent. IDUs and
self-identified SWs using existing programs were recruited through
outreach workers known to them. Those interested in participation were
brought to the program office or, if not possible, to the study office
and met in a confidential room by a gender-matched study representative.
No data were recorded on those declining or ineligible for study entry.
At each enrollment site, the study representatives obtained written
informed consent, administered the questionnaire, provided pre-test
counseling, performed whole-blood rapid testing, and completed posttest
counseling. The questionnaires assessed sociodemographics, travel
history, sex-work history, and activity for SWs and sexual-activity
history for IDUs, past and current drug-use behaviors, past and current
STI symptoms, condom (men and women) and contraceptive (women only) use,
and knowledge about HIV. SW participants received a nonmonetary gift of
hygiene and grooming supplies ( *e.g* ., shampoo, toothpaste), whereas
IDU participants received a small nonmonetary gift of hygiene items (
*e.g* . razor, soap) with referrals for addiction treatment and Needle
and Syringe Programs (NSPs) on request.

Rapid HIV-1 antibody testing was performed with Abbott Determine ^®^
(Abbott Diagnostics Japan, Tokyo, Japan); participants with a positive
Determine ^®^ HIV test underwent sequential testing with a second rapid
test, HIV (1 + 2) Antibody Colloidal Gold (KHB Kehua Shanghai).
Repeatedly positive rapid HIV tests were confirmed with Western Blot
(HIV BLOT 2.2, GeneLabs Diagnostics, Singapore). Genotyping of HIV-1
strains was conducted by using primary peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) by the same methods described in the earlier Kabul
analysis. ^10^ Descriptive statistics were generated for genotyped
samples. Phylogenetic analysis was with PHYLIP, including SEQBOOT,
DNADIST, NEIGHBOR, and CONSENSE modules, and trees were constructed with
Treetool. ^11^ Analysis of recombinant forms was performed in stages.
Bootscan analysis with reference strains of subtypes A (KEML013), C
(97TZ05), D (99UGK09958), and K (MP535C) was performed. The breakpoints
across each genome were precisely mapped with recombination breakpoint
analysis and visual inspection. ^11\ ,\ 12^

Of 623 IDUs recruited in three cities, 11 (1.77%) were HIV positive, all
of whom were enrolled in Hirat. In total, 544 SWs were enrolled, of whom
only one SW, recruited in Mazar-i-Sharif, was HIV positive (0.18%). The
SW in Mazar was female, married, and had lived outside Afghanistan in
Pakistan in the past 5 years, but had engaged in sex work only in
Afghanistan. One sample from Hirat could not be successfully amplified
and analyzed. Of the 10 HIV-positive IDUs from Hirat, all were male,
with a mean age of 32.7 years. Most were married (72.7%) and had \>6
years of formal education (72.7%). The mean reported duration of
injecting was 2.45 years (SD = 1.63 years), with a daily average of two
injections. Approximately half (54.5%) reported sharing syringes in the
last 6 months.

Complete genetic sequences were obtained from the 11 participants, with
Fig. 1 denoting genotypes by clade. The SW participant harbored a
CRF01_AE strain, which bootstrap values indicate varied little from
genotypes previously described in Southeast Asia. ^13^ Of interest, the
SW genotype identified did not match that in the IDU networks in Kabul
and Hirat; this may indicate limited mixing between IDU and SW networks,
although our small sample precludes more definitive inferences.

FIG. 1.

Full clade tree inclusive of all Afghan genotypes identified to date.

The 10 samples from the Hirat IDU were all CRF35_AD. The analyzed
subregions (gag p 17 and ENV C1-C5) revealed close homology between the
Hirat IDU specimens and with the previously described Kabul specimens
(data not shown). ^10^ The relations among the Hirat strains were also
informative. Among these 10, three distinct subclusters comprised two or
three strains, whereas two other Hirat strains were generally
equidistant from the Kabul strains. One Hirat subcluster had a larger
portion of Subtype D genetic material in gp120 when compared with
strains in Kabul; the Kabul strains were not part of the three
identified subclusters within CRF35_AD. These data are consistent with
more direct and extended chains of HIV transmission in the Hirat IDUs
compared with those from Kabul. These data reinforce the connection
between incipient epidemics of IDUs in two Afghan cities, Kabul and
Hirat, by the identity of circulating HIV subtypes.

With results from an earlier study of Kabul IDUs, the identification of
additional CRF35_AD circulating recombinants among IDUs in Hirat brings
the number of complete genomes of this strain from Afghanistan to 14.
^10^ Previous sequences from Kabul were compared with those described
from IDUs in Iran, both in Mashad and in Tehran. ^4\ ,\ 5^ Although
genotypes for IDU in Iran and Afghanistan are quite similar, and most
Afghan IDU harboring this strain had been refugees in Iran, where they
began injecting drugs, genotype results alone cannot establish strain
origin, and conjectures based solely on this evidence are unwarranted.
^14^ The close phylogenetic linkage between clusters of strains from
IDUs in Hirat ( Fig. 1 ) is consistent with a smaller, more
interconnected network in that city. The small sample size and lack of
information on certain behaviors and, most important, the ascertainment
of prevalent infections of unknown duration are limitations of our
study.

The molecular epidemiology of HIV transmission in high-risk groups in
Afghanistan remains incomplete, providing impetus for further work.
Based on the available data, it appears that HIV infection among IDUs is
widely but incompletely disseminated in the country, and that the
genotypic profile of HIV infection among SWs is difficult to assess
because of the low number of observed infections and limited access to
this population. The first glimpse of molecular data suggests that IDU
and SW networks may not be intimately connected, but these findings
warrant further study.

The results indicate that the nascent HIV epidemic among IDUs in Hirat
is largely, if not entirely, subtype CRF35 \_AD, the same genotype
described in Kabul and several sites in Iran. ^10\ ,\ 14^ The close
homology between various samples from Hirat suggests recent infection;
thus, harm-reduction programs incorporating voluntary HIV testing and
counseling, appropriate provision of antiretroviral therapy, and
opioid-substitution therapy and NSPs should be supported in Hirat city,
in addition to other affected areas of the country.




## Sequence Data

HIV-1 full genome sequences from this study have been submitted to
GenBank, and the accession numbers are GQ477441-GQ477451 .



