# HIV-1 Reverse Transcriptase Drug-Resistance Mutations in Chronically Infected Individuals Receiving or Naïve to HAART in Cameroon

## Abstract

The most common first-line, highly active anti-retroviral therapy
(HAART) received by individuals infected with HIV-1 in Cameroon is the
combination therapy Triomune, comprised of two nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) and one non-NRTI (NNRTI). To examine the
efficacy of these drugs in Cameroon, where diverse non-B HIV-1 subtypes
and recombinant viruses predominate, the reverse transcriptase (RT)
viral sequences in patient plasma were analyzed for the presence of
mutations that confer drug resistance. Forty-nine HIV-1-positive
individuals were randomly selected from those receiving care in HIV/AIDS
outpatient clinics in the South-West and North-West Regions of Cameroon.
Among the 28 patients receiving HAART, 39% (11/28) had resistance to
NRTIs, and 46% (13/28) to NNRTIs after a median of 12 months from the
start of therapy. Among those with drug-resistance mutations, there was
a median of 14 months from the start of HAART, versus 9 months for those
without; no difference was observed in the average viral load (10,997
copies/ml vs. 8,056 copies/ml). In contrast, drug-naïve individuals had
a significantly higher average viral load (27,929 copies/ml) than those
receiving HAART (9,527 copies/ml). Strikingly, among the 21 drug-naïve
individuals, 24% harbored viruses with drug-resistance mutations,
suggesting that HIV-1 drug-resistant variants are being transmitted in
Cameroon. Given the high frequency of resistance mutations among those
on first-line HAART, coupled with the high prevalence of HIV-1 variants
with drug-resistance mutations among drug-naïve individuals, this study
emphasizes the need for extensive monitoring of resistance mutations and
the introduction of a second-line HAART strategy in Cameroon.



## Materials And Methods

### Study Participants

The samples analyzed in this study are part of a larger study aimed at
analyzing the HIV-1 genetic diversity of infected individuals in
Cameroon. Thus, 49 plasma samples were selected at random from
HIV-1-positive individuals attending and/or receiving ARV therapy in
clinics in the South-West and North-West Regions. The specimens used
were obtained from these individuals in calendar years 2006 and 2007,
and included drug-naïve individuals (n = 21) as well as individuals
receiving first-line HAART (n = 28) due to a CD4 T-cell count of ≤200
cells/mm ^3^ . A detailed questionnaire, including the date of diagnosis
of their HIV infection, mode of infection, treatment history, and
demographic information was administered to each participant after
signing an informed consent.

### RNA Extraction, PCR, and Sequencing

Viral RNA extraction from the participant\'s plasma was performed using
the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA) followed by
reverse transcription using the Superscript III First-Strand Synthesis
System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), following the manufacturer\'s
instructions. A 1,596-bp region of the *pol* gene, covering the RT (p51)
and most of the RNase H (p15) was amplified from the extracted RNA using
nested PCR. For the first round PCR, the forward primer RTPOL1F
(5′-GTATTAGTAGGACCTACACCTGTC-3′; HXB2 location 2475--2498) and the
reverse primer RTPOL1R (5′-ACCTTCCTGATTCCATTACTGAC-3′; HXB2 location
4203--4225) were used. For the nested PCR, forward primer RTPOL2F
(5′-TAAAGCCAGGAATGGATGGCCC-3′; HXB2 location 2584--2605) and reverse
primer RTPOL2R (5′-CCTCCAATCCCTTTGTGTGCTG-3′; HXB2 location 4159--4180)
were used. The cycling conditions for both PCRs were an initial
denaturation of 2 min at 94°C, followed by 35 cycles at 94, 50, and 72°C
for 60, 60, 90 sec, respectively, and a final extension step of 7 min at
72°C. PCR products were then separated by agarose gel electrophoresis
and amplicons of the expected size were excised and extracted from the
gel using the QIAquick spin gel extraction kit (Qiagen, Inc.). Direct
sequencing of the 5′ and 3′ ends of the purified PCR amplicons were
performed with the two nested primers RTPOLF2 and RTPOLR2, and primer
walking using the ABI Big Dye Terminator cycle sequencing chemistry on
an ABI 3730XL instrument.

### Phylogenetic Analysis

All sequences were automatically aligned with reference sequences of all
known HIV-1 group M (sub-) subtypes (A1, A2, B, C, D, F1, F2, G, H, J,
and K) and circulating recombinant forms (CRFs) from the Los Alamos HIV
sequence database using CLUSTAL X with minor manual adjustments.
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using the MEGA version 3.1 software
package \[ Kumar et al., 2004 \] with pairwise evolutionary distances
estimated by using Kimura\'s two-parameter method. Phylogenetic trees
were constructed by the neighbor-joining method and the reliability of
the topologies was estimated by performing bootstrap analysis (1,000
replicates). Clustering of sequences with a bootstrap value of more than
70% was considered significant for subtyping.

### Drug-Resistance Genotyping

The RT DNA sequences amplified from patients receiving HAART and those
who were ARV drug naive were analyzed for potential drug-resistance
mutations using the Stanford University HIV database
genotypic-resistance interpretation algorithm (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/index.html ). This program identifies
documented drug-resistance mutations in user-entered sequences and
infers the level of resistance to NRTIs, NNRTIs, and protease inhibitors
(PIs). In addition, the drug-resistance results were cross-checked with
the International AIDS Society-USA consensus mutation figures \[ Johnson
et al., 2008 \] and only major mutations conferring a several-fold
reduction in viral sensitivity to all current, FDA approved, ARVs
(including those prescribed to the study individuals) were included in
the analysis.

### RTI Genotypic Drug-Resistance Mutation Analysis

The RT sequences from the 49 HIV-1-positive individuals were analyzed
for mutations associated with NRTI and NNRTI drug resistance using the
HIValg program available on the Stanford University HIV Drug-Resistance
Database website \[ Rhee et al., 2003 \]. Mutations in the study
sequences were defined as differences from the consensus B reference
sequence and were further characterized as NRTI-resistance mutations,
NNRTI-resistance mutations, or other mutations which consists primarily
of accessory mutations (those which have little to no effect on drug
susceptibility in of themselves) and polymorphisms. In addition, the
HIValg program scores each mutation, using three different algorithms
(ANRS, Agence Nationale de Recherches sur le SIDA; HIVDB, Standford
University HIV Drug-Resistance Database; Rega Institute) in order to
compare predicted levels of associated drug resistance. For each
sequence analyzed, the drug-resistance interpretation was compared for
consistency and only the results given by the HIVDB algorithm, whereby
drug resistance was predicted to be "high-level" are presented here
unless otherwise indicated ( Table I ).

### Viral Load Determination

The viral load of each study individual was determined by the Versant
HIV RNA 3.0 Assay (bDNA; Siemens, IL) using the same plasma specimen
used for the sequencing of RT, and was performed as recommended by the
manufacturer.



## Results

### Characteristics of Study Individuals

All patients receiving HAART were provided with the drugs free-of-charge
from the Ministry of Public Health when CD4 T-cell-counts of ≤200
cells/mm ^3^ or a WHO clinical stage 4 was determined. Among the treated
individuals (n = 28), the average number of months on HAART prior to
inclusion in the study was 13.7 (median = 12 months), and 79% were
receiving the FDC Triomune (3TC/d4T/NVP). The remaining six individuals
were prescribed either a combination of lamivudine and stavudine
(3TC/d4T; n = 1), lamivudine and nevirapine (3TC/NVP; n = 2), Duovir and
Stocrin (3TC/AZT and EFV; n = 2), or Stocrin alone (EFV; n = 1). The
median age of all study individuals (including those receiving HAART and
HAART naïve) was 34 years (range: 18--58) and 59% were women ( Tables I
and ​ andII). II ). The average viral load for the patients receiving
HAART with drug-resistance mutations (n = 13) was 10,997 copies/ml
compared to 8,056 copies/ml for those without (n = 13; 2 not tested).
Among the drug-naïve individuals (n = 21), the average viral load was
27,929 copies/ml ( Table II ). The percentage of individuals with
undetectable viral loads (\<75 copies/ml) for patients receiving HAART
with drug-resistance mutations, patients receiving HAART without
mutations, and drug-naïve individuals were 23%, 38%, and 10%,
respectively.


### NRTI-Resistance Mutations Among Patients Receiving HAART

Of the 28 study individuals who were on treatment, 11 (39%) harbored
viruses that had at least one genotypic NRTI-resistance mutation
conferring drug resistance ( Table I ). The viral RT sequences from all
of these individuals contained the M184VI mutation, which is known to
confer up to 300-fold reduced susceptibility to lamivudine (3TC) and a
high level of resistance to emtricitabine (FTC) (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/index.html ). Additionally, the thymidine
analog mutation (TAM) T215Y, which confers high-level drug resistance to
stavudine (d4T) and zidovudine (AZT), was found in the viruses infecting
individuals 06ARC036, 07BDHS077, and 07LPH142 ( Table I ). The
multi-NRTI-resistance mutation, Q151M, was found in the three patients
receiving HAART; 06ARC007, 06BDHS005, and 06LPH20SC, of which only
06BDHS005 had the additional accessory mutations V75I, F77L, and F116Y.
The combination of mutations found in individual 06BDHS005 form the
Q151M mutation complex, which confers a greater level of resistance to
abacavir (ABC), didanosine (DDI), d4T, and AZT. Moreover, the Q151M
complex reduces 3TC susceptibility by 10-fold \[ Shafer et al., 1995 \].
Lacking this complex, individuals 06ARC007 and 06LPH20SC were predicted
to have unaffected 3TC susceptibility yet a high level of resistance to
ABC, DDI, d4T, and AZT ( Table I ).

The mutation K65R was detected in viruses from two individuals, 06ARC007
and 06ARC076. The virus infecting patient 06ARC076 contained no other
NRTI-resistance mutations and was predicted to have intermediate
resistance to all NRTIs (data not shown) except AZT, for which the K65R
mutation has been shown to increase susceptibility \[ Delaugerre et al.,
2005 ; Parikh et al., 2006 ; White et al., 2006 \]. Conversely, four
additional NRTI-resistance mutations, A62V, F116Y, Q151M, and M184VI
were identified for the virus infecting individual 06ARC007, indicating
a high level of resistance to 3TC, FTC, ABC, d4T, and DDI ( Table I ).
Overall analysis of NRTI-resistance mutations among the patients
receiving HAART (n = 28) revealed a total of eight different mutations,
including M184VI (39%) and T215Y (11%), conferring high-level resistance
to 3TC and d4T, respectively. Both aforementioned ARVs are components of
Triomune, the most frequently prescribed therapy in Cameroon. Of the
remaining six NRTI mutations, five are considered multi-resistance
mutations, including: F116Y (11%), Q151M (11%), A62V (7%), V75I (4%),
and F77L (4%). The last mutation, K65R, was found in the virus from one
individual (4%), conferring high-level resistance to ABC, DDI, and TDF.

### NNRTI-Resistance Mutations Among Patients Receiving HAART

A total of 13 (46%) of the 28 patients receiving HAART were infected
with viruses that harbored at least one NNRTI-resistance mutation, of
which 11 concomitantly had at least one NRTI-resistance mutation ( Table
I ). The most frequently observed NNRTI-resistance mutations were K103NS
and Y181C, representing 14% and 18% of the viruses infecting patients
receiving HAART in this study, respectively. Both of these mutations
confer high-level resistance to nevirapine (NVP) and delaviridine (DLV),
while additional resistance to either efavirenz (EFV) or etravirine
(ETR) has been attributed to the mutation K103NS and Y181C,
respectively. Also contributing to a high level of resistance to NVP,
the G190A mutation was identified in viruses infecting three
individuals, 06ARC036, 06LPH02NJM, and 06LPH17HT. Notably, patient
07LPH17HT was the only individual whose virus was predicted to have
high-level resistance mutation to an NNRTI but lacked any
NRTI-resistance mutation ( Table I ). Conferring high-level resistance
to both NVP and DLV, the NNRTI-drug-resistance mutation V106A was
identified in viruses infecting individuals 07BDHS077 and 07LPH149. The
remaining four resistance mutations, conferring a lesser degree of
resistance, V108I, V179E, Y188L, and F227L, were found among the
patients receiving HAART, at frequencies of 7%, 7%, 4%, and 11%,
respectively. The remaining 15 (54%) out of 28 patients receiving HAART
had no major genotypic mutations ( Table I ); however, it was observed
that these individuals had been on treatment for fewer months than those
who had mutations, as the median months from the start of HAART was 10
months for this group compared to 14 months for the individuals
harboring mutations.

### NRTI- and NNRTI-Resistance Mutations Among Drug-Naive Individuals

Of the 21 drug-naïve individuals studied, 5 (24%) were infected with
viruses that harbored one or more genotypic drug-resistance mutations, 2
of whom had mutations to both the NRTI and NNRTI classes of ARVs ( Table
II ). Of interest, the viruses infecting the two individuals 06BDHS024
and 06BDHS028 harbored the M184VI mutation, conferring a high level of
resistance to 3TC and FTC. Additionally, the NNRTI-resistance mutations
K103NS and Y181C were identified in viruses from patients 06BDHS024 and
06BDHS028, respectively. These NNRTI-resistance mutations both confer
high-level resistance to NVP and DLV, while mutation K103NS is also
predicted to confer high-level resistance to EFV. In addition to the
mutations described above that confer high-level resistance, two
additional NNRTI-resistance mutations, V179E and G190A, were found in
the viruses infecting individuals, 06ARC013 and 07BDHS054, respectively.
These mutations are predictive of low- or intermediate-level drug
resistance. Taken together, the presence of the NRTI- and
NNRTI-resistance mutations in the viruses infecting the drug-naïve
individuals suggests that these variants were transmitted, possibly from
patients on HAART.

### Analysis of HIV-1 Subtypes and Drug-Resistance Mutations

Phylogenetic analysis of the RT gene revealed a predominance of the
CRF02_AG variant and a broad HIV-1 genetic diversity as follows: 73%
CRF02_AG (n = 36), 6% D, 6% A, 4% F2, 2% CRF11_cpx, 2% CRF13_cpx, and 6%
U (unclassifiable) ( Tables I and ​ andII; II ; Fig. 1 ).

Fig. 1

Phylogenetic tree of reverse transcriptase DNA sequences. The sequences
analyzed are shown in bold italics. U, unclassifiable subtype. HIV-1
group M reference strains for subtypes A1, A2, B, C, D, F1, F2, G, H, J,
K, CRF02_AG, CRF11_cpx, and CRF13_cpx were used to construct the tree
using the neighbor-joining method of TREECON, Kimura\'s two-parameter
method, mid-point rooting, and 1,000 bootstrap replicates.

First, a comparison of potential differences in the resistance mutations
between patients receiving HAART who were infected with CRF02_AG (n =
24) or non-CRF02_AG (n = 4) viruses was performed ( Table III ).
Overall, the genotypic-resistance mutations were comparable, notably the
NRTI-resistance mutation M184VI was found with the most frequency in
both groups of individuals. No single NNRTI-resistance mutation appeared
to be more prevalent in either group. Of interest, some NRTI- and
NNRTI-resistance mutations were found exclusively in one group of
patients (those infected with CRF02_AG viruses vs. those infected with
non-CRF02_AG viruses), however, given the small number of non-CRF02_AG
viruses examined, more samples need to be tested in order to determine
whether a differential pattern exists.


A comparison was also made of the RTI-resistance mutations among
CRF02_AG-infected patients receiving HAART from the current study (n =
24) with a panel available in the "HIVseq: Literature Prevalence of
Mutations in Submitted Sequences" program at the Stanford University HIV
Drug-Resistance Database website was performed ( Table III ). A total of
139 sequences from CRF02_AG-infected individuals with an ARV history
that included administration of both NRTIs and NNRTIs were examined. The
CRF02_AG sequences compiled from the database revealed a similar
NRTI-resistance mutation profile to those in the current study, whereby
A62V, K65R F116Y, Q151M, and T215Y were all observed at a low frequency
while M184VI was the most prevalent. Comparison of the NNRTI-resistance
mutations revealed mutationY188L was absent among the CRF02_AG-infected
individuals in the present study, yet occurred at a low frequency among
the CRF02_AG-infected individuals in the database. Unlike the
NRTI-resistance mutations, no single NNRTI-resistance mutation appeared
to be more prevalent among the study individuals. However, this finding
was not observed with the CRF02_AG sequences from the database, whereby
the NNRTI-resistance mutation, K103NS was seen with the greatest
frequency (29%). In addition, the NNRTI-resistance mutation Y181C was
reported in 7% of the database CRF02_AG infections; while among the
CRF02_AG-infected study individuals, a slightly higher percentage of 17%
was observed.



## Discussion

The current study reveals a high level of drug resistance among patients
receiving HAART and drug-naïve individuals in Cameroon, demonstrated by
46% of the study individuals who were on HAART for a median period of 12
months harbored genotypic drug-resistance mutations. This finding is
similar to that reported in other sub-Saharan African countries
including Gabon (58%) \[ Vergne et al., 2002 \], Cote d\'Ivoire (57%) \[
Adje et al., 2001 \], and Uganda (52%) \[ Richard et al., 2004 \]. In
particular, 39% of the patients receiving HAART in this study were
predicted to have resistance to an NRTI, and 46% to an NNRTI. Of note is
that the 13 out of 28 patients receiving HAART with drug-resistance
mutations were on treatment for a median of 14 months, while the
remaining 15 individuals whose viruses did not harbor drug-resistance
mutations had been on treatment for a median of only 9 months, a finding
which is consistent with what is known about prolonged ARV pressure on
HIV-1 and the frequency of drug-resistance mutations. This therefore
suggests that the individuals who do not show evidence of
drug-resistance mutations are likely to develop resistance within
another year. Therefore, monitoring of such patients for the emergence
of drug resistance is a necessity to better manage their disease course.

Studies conducted in Yaoundé, Cameroon from 2002 to 2004 \[ Laurent et
al., 2006 \], found a lower level of prevalence of ARV resistance,
whereby 16.4% of the participants had genotypic drug-resistance
mutations after a median of 10 months, including 12.5% resistance to
NRTIs, 10.2% to NNRTIs, and 2.3% to PIs \[ Laurent et al., 2006 \], even
though treatment and laboratory expenses were paid by the patient---an
obstacle to drug adherence that often leads to a higher rate of
drug-resistance mutations. In both studies conducted in Cameroon, the
median of months from the start of HAART prior to sampling was
comparable (10 months vs. 12 months). However, important differences in
treatment were observed, including the administration of PIs, and a
lower number of individuals on suboptimal ART regimens in the Yaoundé
study (2% vs. 10% dual-therapy; 0% vs. 3% mono-therapy). Several factors
could account for the differences in the rate of mutations including
prescription practices, drug availability, support programs, and the
training of physicians in both Yaoundé and in the less urban settings of
Cameroon.

The resistance mutation observed most frequently among the patients
receiving HAART in this study was M184V/I, present in all the patients
with NRTI-resistance mutations, conferring a high-level resistance to
3TC, and was the drug taken by 96% of the study individuals. The M184V/I
mutation also confers resistance to emtricitabine (FTC), which
potentially abrogates the use of this drug for salvage therapy. The
remaining NRTI-resistance mutations among patients receiving HAART in
the current study include K65R, Q151M, and T215Y representing resistance
to all the remaining NRTIs currently approved by the FDA. In fact, 77%
of the individuals in this study with drug-resistance mutations are
infected with viruses that are resistant to two or more NRTIs. The mean
viral load of 10,997 copies/ml for these individuals reflects the great
number of drug-resistance mutations present and suggests the need for
salvage therapy. Of note, three individuals, 06ARC007, 06ARC009, and
07BDHS040 had undetectable viral loads at the time of collection.
Individuals 06ARC007 and 06ARC009 were previously taking Triomune for 3
months and 4 months, respectively, then switched therapy 5 months prior
to sample collection.

In the present study among patients receiving HAART, the majority of
mutations conferred NNRTI resistance; however, no single mutation
predominated, in contrast to the NRTI-resistance mutations. The most
predominant NNRTI-resistance mutations were Y181C (38%), which alone
confers high-level resistance to NVP, DLV, and ETR, and mutation K103NS
identified in 31% (4/13) individuals with drug-resistance mutations.
Irrespective of NVP resistance, 25% of all patients receiving HAART and
9.5% of all drug-naïve individuals had mutations that confer high-level
resistance to at least one of the remaining NNRTIs approved by the FDA,
including DLV, EFV, and ETR. Therefore, the mutations identified here
serve as clear markers for the emergence of drug-resistant variants in
this population and point to potential alternative second-line treatment
options with drugs that would be effective in controlling disease
progression in such individuals.

Subtype analysis of the RT gene revealed a predominance of CRF02_AG
viruses (73%; 36/49) among the study individuals with 86% (24/28) of the
patients receiving HAART harboring this variant. A comparison of the
drug-resistance mutations among the CRF02_AG and non-CRF02_AG variants
revealed subtle differences in the frequency of specific mutations
suggesting that there could be subtype-specific differences, which may
confer resistance to different medications. For example, among
NRTI-resistance mutations, V75I and F77L confer resistance to ABC, DDI,
D4T, and ZDV and were present in the non-CRF02_AG strains but were
absent in the CRF02_AG strains. Differences in mutational patterns that
cause resistance to NNRTIs were also identified among the CRF02_AG and
non-CRF02_AG strains. Though the number of non-CRF02_AG strains studied
is small, others have reported similar findings. Soares et al. \[2007\]
, reported subtype differences in drug-resistance mutations among
subtype B and C sequences of Brazilian HIV-1-infected patients on HAART.
It was also striking to note differences in the mutational patterns
between the Cameroon CRF02_AG and those available in the Stanford
University HIV drug-resistance database, whereby the K103NS mutation
that confers resistance to NNRTIs was present in 29% of the sequences
from the database compared to 17% present among the Cameroonian
sequences. Taken together, studies that examine subtype differences and
the development drug-resistance mutations are urgently needed in the
Central African region in particular, a region of the world that harbors
the highest HIV-1 viral diversity and where first-line HAART use is
increasing. Such studies are underway and will be reported elsewhere.

Data regarding the transmission of drug-resistance mutations in the
current study found five (24%) drug-naïve individuals who harbored
viruses with genotypic drug-resistance mutations to NRTIs and/or NNRTIs.
Earlier studies conducted in Cameroon found the rate of drug-resistance
mutation transmission among drug-naïve individuals ranging between 4.9%
and 9.8% \[ Koizumi et al., 2006 ; Vergne et al., 2006 ; Vessiere et
al., 2006 ; Ndembi et al., 2008 \]. The present analysis reveals an
increase in the rate of transmission of viral variants with
drug-resistance mutations, which could be due in part to the increasing
availability of ARV therapy in the community and/or poor adherence to
treatment. In addition, studies conducted in other African countries
have found a lower frequency of RT drug-resistance mutations among
drug-naive individuals including Mali (11.5%) \[ Derache et al., 2008
\], South Africa (3.6%) \[ Jacobs et al., 2008 \], and Tanzania (3%
NRTI, 4% NNRTI) \[ Nyombi et al., 2008 \]. Taken together, this study
reveals a high prevalence of drug-resistance mutations among patients
receiving HAART (46%) and drug-naïve (24%) individuals in Cameroon. From
a public health standpoint, it is critical to improve efforts to monitor
the emergence of such mutations, to initiate a second-line HAART that
includes a PI, and to monitor drug-naïve individuals to prevent the
spread of resistant variants.

### Nucleotide Sequence Accession Numbers

The DNA sequences of the HIV-1 RT region of Pol that were determined in
this study were submitted to GenBank under the following accession
numbers: GQ344955-GQ345003 .


