G118R and F121Y mutations identified in patients failing raltegravir
treatment confer dolutegravir resistance \| Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy \| Oxford Academic

Skip to Main Content

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

Journals

Books

-

-

-

-

-

-

-
Sign in through your institution

-   Issues
-   More Content
-   BSAC Journals
-   Submit
-   Purchase
-   Alerts
-   About

Close

Navbar Search Filter Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy This issue
BSAC Journals Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Infectious Diseases
Medical Microbiology and Virology Books Journals Oxford Academic Enter
search term Search

Advanced Search

Article Navigation

Volume 70

Issue 3

March 2015

### Article Contents

-
Abstract

-
Introduction

-
Methods

-
Results

-
Discussion

-
Funding

-
Transparency declarations

-
References

-
Author notes

-
Supplementary data

-   \< Previous
-   Next \>

Journal Article


# G118R and F121Y mutations identified in patients failing raltegravir treatment confer dolutegravir resistance

Soundasse Munir

,

Eloise Thierry

,

Isabelle Malet

,

Frédéric Subra

,

Vincent Calvez

,

Anne-Geneviève Marcelin

,

Eric Deprez

,

Olivier Delelis

Author Notes

*Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy* , Volume 70, Issue 3, March
2015, Pages 739--749, https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dku474

Published:

20 November 2014

Article history

-    PDF

-    Split View

-

-
Cite

-

* Permissions Icon * Permissions

-   * Share Icon * Share


## Abstract

Objectives

Strand transfer inhibitors (raltegravir, elvitegravir and dolutegravir)
are now commonly used to inhibit HIV-1 integration. To date, three main
pathways conferring raltegravir/elvitegravir resistance, involving
residues Y143, Q148 and N155, have been described. However, no pathway
has been clearly described for dolutegravir resistance. The aim of this
study was to characterize the susceptibility of two mutations, F121Y and
G118R, originally described in patients failing raltegravir-containing
regimens, to dolutegravir and raltegravir, and then to compare the
resistance of these mutations with that of other well-known mutations
involved in raltegravir resistance.

Methods

Both the F121Y and G118R mutations were introduced by site-directed
mutagenesis into the pNL4.3 backbone and studied in cell-based and *in
vitro* assays. The effects of the mutations were characterized at the
different steps of infection by quantitative PCR.

Results

Results obtained with *in vitro* and *ex vivo* assays consistently
showed that both mutations impaired the catalytic properties of
integrase, especially at the integration step. Moreover, both mutations
conferred an intermediate level of resistance to dolutegravir.
Interestingly, the F121Y mutation, but not the G118R mutation, displayed
differential resistance to raltegravir and dolutegravir. Indeed, the
F121Y mutation was more resistant to raltegravir than to dolutegravir.

Conclusions

Mutations at G118 and F121, which have been described in patients
failing raltegravir-containing regimens, must be included in
drug-resistance-testing algorithms.

HIV , integrases , strand transfer inhibitors

Topic:

-    mutation
-    raltegravir
-    dolutegravir
-    transfer technique

Issue Section:

ORIGINAL RESEARCH


## Introduction

The integration of HIV-1 DNA into the host genome confers stability on
viral DNA and enables the expression of viral genes leading to the
subsequent formation of progeny viruses. Therefore, this integration
step is a key step in HIV-1 replication. Integration is catalysed by
integrase (IN), which is encoded by the *pol* gene of the virus. IN
catalyses two successive reactions during this process (for a review,
see Delelis *et al* . ^\ \ 1^ ). The first reaction, named 3′-processing
(3′-P), involves the removal of the canonical terminal GpT dinucleotides
at each end of both long terminal repeats (LTRs). This reaction
generates CpA 3′-hydroxyl ends, which participate in the second
reaction, named strand transfer.

Due to the central and critical place of integration in HIV-1
replication, IN inhibitors belonging to the class of strand transfer
inhibitors (INSTIs) constitute promising compounds that enrich the
number of available antiretroviral drugs. ^\ \ 2\ ,\ \ \ 3^ These
compounds bind to the complex formed by IN and viral DNA (and not to IN
alone) and specifically inhibit the strand transfer reaction by
displacing the processed viral DNA end (probably by competition with
binding to target DNA mimicking the host cell genome). ^\ \ 4\ ,\ \ \ 5^
Raltegravir and elvitegravir are two potent INSTIs approved by the FDA.
^\ \ 6--10^ Although these compounds are very effective at inhibiting
integration, drug-resistance mutations have been reported that threaten
the long-term efficacy of HAART. ^\ \ 11^ To date, three pathways of
resistance have been clearly described in patients receiving raltegravir
and *in vitro* studies have confirmed that resistance involves primary
mutations in the IN sequence at positions N155, Q148 and Y143.
^\ \ 12--14^ Mutations described in patients failing elvitegravir
include mutations at Q148, E92, N155, T66, S147 and T97. ^\ \ 15^
Importantly, there is extensive cross-resistance between raltegravir and
elvitegravir. ^\ \ 16^ Several second-generation INSTIs have been
developed, such as MK-2048 and dolutegravir, which are more potent than
first-generation INSTIs, ^\ \ 17--20^ most likely due to the higher
stability of IN/DNA/drug ternary complexes. ^\ \ 21^ Most strains
resistant to raltegravir and elvitegravir do not show cross-resistance
to dolutegravir. Indeed, the pathways involving N155 and Y143 residues,
which are responsible for raltegravir resistance, are efficiently
inhibited by dolutegravir. ^\ \ 22\ ,\ \ \ 23^ However, some mutants of
the Q148 pathway are resistant to dolutegravir. ^\ \ 22\ ,\ \ \ 23^ This
mutation is often associated with secondary mutations at position 138 or
140.

In the case of dolutegravir, attempts to select resistant strains using
*in vitro* culture have been unsuccessful. Initially, some mutations,
such as those at residues T124, S153 and L101, were identified but the
significance of these mutations remains uncertain. ^\ \ 23^ More
recently, a mutation at position R263, located in the C-terminal region
of IN, was identified during *in vitro* selection; however, this
mutation confers only a low level of resistance to dolutegravir.
^\ \ 24^ Finally, the selection of viruses resistant to dolutegravir
also identified an arginine substitution at position G118, although this
mutant was only present among subtype C or CRF02_A/G strains and not
subtype B strains. ^\ \ 24^ Dolutegravir has been evaluated as
first-line therapy in treatment-naive patients in three different Phase
III trials, SPRING-2, SINGLE and FLAMINGO, ^\ \ 25--27^ versus third
agents currently recommended by the guidelines: raltegravir, efavirenz
and boosted darunavir, respectively. The primary endpoint was an HIV-1
RNA concentration of \<50 copies/mL at week 48. The results of these
studies indicated that dolutegravir was non-inferior to raltegravir and
was superior to efavirenz and boosted darunavir. Moreover, there was no
evidence of treatment-emergent resistance in patients showing
virological failure with dolutegravir. Taken together, these studies
confirm that dolutegravir possesses a higher genetic barrier for
resistance than its first-generation counterparts.

In this study, we characterized mutations at positions F121 and G118
that had recently been described in patients failing
raltegravir-containing regimens. ^\ \ 28^ Using recombinant IN assays as
well as virological experiments, we studied the effect of each mutation
on the susceptibility to dolutegravir. We also compared the resistance
associated with these mutations with that involving the Q148K residue in
combination with the E138K mutation, which is found in strains that are
strongly resistant to dolutegravir. ^\ \ 23^ We show that both G118R and
F121Y lead to an intermediate level of resistance to dolutegravir,
between the levels associated with E138K (no resistance against
dolutegravir) and E138K/Q148K, which confers the strongest level of
resistance. Furthermore, a mutation at position E138 rescued the
activity of the Q148K mutant and conferred strong dolutegravir
resistance on the E138K/Q148K double mutant, similar to the effect of a
mutation at the G140 residue associated with Q148H/R. Although the
pathways involved in dolutegravir resistance are not yet known,
non-polymorphic mutations described in patients failing raltegravir
display a variable profile of dolutegravir resistance that should be
considered before administering dolutegravir.


## Methods

### Cells and viruses

HeLa-P4 and 293-T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10%
heat-inactivated FBS. MT4 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 with 10% FBS.
All the cells were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO ~2~ . HIV-1 IN mutants
were obtained by site-directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange
Lightning site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent) according to the
manufacturer\'s instructions. Briefly, the fragment encoding the IN of
the replication-competent pNL4.3 virus was digested with AgeI and EcoRI
and inserted into the pGEM-T vector (Promega). After mutagenesis, all
the constructs were sequenced and the fragment encoding IN was then
inserted into pNL4.3. HIV-1 stocks were prepared by transfecting 293-T
cells with the various HIV-1 molecular clones. Transfection assays were
carried out using the calcium phosphate method. Forty-eight hours
post-transfection, the viral supernatant was filtered through a filter
with a pore size of 0.45 μm and was frozen at −80°C. The concentration
of HIV-1 p24 ^gag^ antigen in the viral inocula was determined by ELISA
(Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences).

### HIV infectivity assay

Single-cycle titres of the virus were determined in HeLa-P4 cells
expressing a β-galactosidase gene under the control of the HIV Tat
protein. Briefly, cells were infected in triplicate in 96-well plates
with WT or the different IN mutants (the equivalent of 3 ng of p24 ^gag^
antigen) with or without increasing concentrations of raltegravir or
dolutegravir. Cell survival was estimated with a standard MTT assay. The
MTT assay revealed that the highest concentration of dolutegravir used
in this study (300 nM) was not cytotoxic \[at 48 and 72 h post-infection
(p.i.)\] ( Figure S1, available as Supplementary data at JAC Online ).
This was also true of raltegravir. ^\ \ 29^ The viral titre was then
determined by quantifying the β-galactosidase activity in HeLa-P4
lysates with a colorimetric assay based on the cleavage of chlorophenol
red-β- d -galactopyranoside (CPRG) by β-galactosidase. The 50% effective
concentration (EC ~50~ ) of each drug was defined as the drug
concentration resulting in β-galactosidase activity that was 50% lower
than that in infected cells without the drug.

### Viral infections

Viral infections were performed using MT4 cells (2 × 10 ^6^ /mL with 20
ng of p24 ^gag^ antigen per 10 ^6^ cells) with or without drugs. Four
hours p.i., the cells were washed in PBS and new medium was added. At
various times p.i., 1 million to 2 million cells were harvested and the
dry pellets were frozen at −80°C until use.

### DNA extraction and quantitative PCR

To digest residual transfection plasmid, the collected cell samples were
washed in PBS and incubated with 2 U of DNase I, amplification grade
(Invitrogen), for 20 min at room temperature according to the
manufacturer\'s instructions. As a result of this DNase treatment, the
signal from any residual transfection plasmid was negligible for all IN
mutant preparations using heat-inactivated viruses. Total DNA from the
previously described dry pellets was extracted with the QIAamp blood DNA
minikit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer\'s instructions. Viral
DNA forms (total viral DNA and integrated viral DNA) were quantified by
real-time PCR on a LightCycler instrument using the FastStart DNA master
hybridization probe kit (Roche Diagnostics) as previously described.
^\ \ 14^ The copy number of total HIV-1 DNA was determined from a
standard curve prepared by the amplification of quantities ranging from
10 to 10 ^5^ copies of cloned DNA with matching sequences. Integrated
HIV-1 DNA was quantified by real-time *Alu* -LTR nested PCR as
previously described. ^\ \ 14^ The integrated HIV-1 DNA copy number was
determined from a standard curve generated by the concomitant two-stage
PCR amplification of serial dilutions of an integrated HIV-1 DNA
standard as previously described. ^\ \ 30^ The cell equivalents of each
DNA sample were calculated based on the amplification of the β-globin
gene with commercially available material (Control Kit DNA; Roche
Diagnostics). Total viral DNA and integrated viral DNA were expressed as
the copy number per 10 ^6^ cells. Quantification was carried out with
the second-derivative-maximum method provided by the LightCycler
quantification software, version 3.5 (Roche Diagnostics).

### Characterization of IN enzymatic activity in vitro

Recombinant IN from the pNL4.3 strain was produced in *Escherichia coli*
BL21-CodonPlus (DE3)-RIPL (Agilent) and purified under non-denaturing
conditions as previously described. ^\ \ 31^ An oligonucleotide (ODN)
mimicking the unprocessed U5 LTR end of the viral genome (U5B: 5′-GTG
TGG AAA ATC TCT AGC AGT-3′) as well as an ODN mimicking the 3′-processed
extremity (U5B-2: 5′-GTG TGG AAA ATC TCT AGC A-3′) were radiolabelled
with T4 polynucleotide kinase (NEB) and \[γ- ^32^ P\]ATP (Amersham) and
were then purified on a Sephadex G-10 column. Double-stranded ODNs were
obtained by mixing equimolar amounts of ODNs with the complementary
strand U5A: 5′-ACT GCT AGA GAT TTT CCA CAC-3′ in the presence of 100 mM
NaCl. The 3′-processing assay and strand transfer reactions were carried
out at 37°C with 300 nM of IN in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES (pH
6.8), 1 mM dithiothreitol, 7.5 mM MgCl ~2~ and 50 mM NaCl in the
presence of 6.25 nM U5A/U5B or 12.5 nM U5A/U5B-2, respectively. The
products were separated in a 16% acrylamide/urea denaturing gel,
analysed with a Typhoon TRIO variable mode imager (GE Healthcare) and
quantified with ImageQuant TL software. Strand transfer products were
represented by all bands above the substrate (19-mer). The efficiency of
the reaction was expressed as the percentage of the intensity of the
signal of the strand transfer products divided by the intensity of the
signal of the substrate (19-mer). The susceptibility of IN to
raltegravir and dolutegravir was determined *in vitro* by assessing IN
activity in the presence of various concentrations of INSTIs. The IC
~50~ was determined with Prism 5.0 software.

### Steady-state fluorescence anisotropy-based assay

Anisotropy-based assay is a quantitative method to determine the
DNA-binding parameters of IN. ^\ \ 32^ Briefly, IN binding to
fluorescein-labelled DNA duplex (composed of a 21-mer 5′-Fl-GTG TGG AAA
ATC TCT AGC AGT-3′ annealed with its complementary strand) increases the
steady-state anisotropy value \[measured on a Beacon instrument
(Panvera, Madison, WI, USA)\], allowing the calculation of the fraction
of DNA sites bound to IN as previously described. ^\ \ 32^ The
DNA-binding step was recorded at 25°C. The formation of IN/DNA complexes
was performed by incubating 4 nM fluorescein-labelled ODNs with IN in
buffer A \[20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 1 mM dithiothreitol, 10 mM MgCl ~2~ and
50 mM NaCl\]. The binding of IN mutants was expressed as a percentage of
the IN WT binding.


## Results

### Characterization of raltegravir resistance mutations in cell-based assays

Two non-polymorphic mutations (G118R and F121Y) were recently reported
in two patients failing raltegravir treatment. ^\ \ 28^ The G118R
mutation was detected in a patient infected with a CRF02_A/G virus
whereas the F121Y mutation was detected in a patient infected with a
subtype B strain. ^\ \ 28^ We first investigated the replicative
properties of viruses containing G118R or F121Y mutations and their
ability to produce viral particles. We compared these strains with the
E138K/Q148K double mutant, which is one of the most resistant mutants
against both anti-IN drugs. ^\ \ 22\ ,\ \ \ 23^ The E138K and Q148K
single mutants were also generated to study the effect of each mutation
in the context of the double mutant. First, we transfected 239-T cells
with these mutants and examined viral production by measuring the
abundance of p24 ^gag^ . The production of p24 ^gag^ by these mutants
was similar to that by the WT virus, showing that none of these
mutations substantially impaired the late steps of viral replication,
including viral assembly and viral release (Figure 1 a).

Figure 1.

Characterization of IN mutants. (a) Quantification of p24 ^gag^ antigen
48 h post-transfection of 293-T cells with 5 μg of WT or mutant viral
DNA. (b) Viral infectivity of WT and IN mutants. Viral infectivity was
quantified in a single-round replication assay using HeLa-P4 cells. A
total of 3 ng of p24 ^gag^ antigen was used for infection. Efavirenz
(EFV; 200 nM) was used as a control to ensure that the β-galactosidase
activity originated from viral infection. The early steps of infection
were assessed by measuring β-galactosidase activity in cell extracts by
the CPRG method 48 h p.i. (a and b) p24 ^gag^ antigen and
β-galactosidase activity are expressed as percentages of the values
obtained for the WT. (c) HIV-1 DNA species monitored by quantitative
PCR. MT4 cells were infected with IN mutants (20 ng of p24 ^gag^ /10 ^6^
cells). Total viral DNA was monitored at several timepoints p.i. until
72 h. (d) Integrated viral DNA was quantified 48 h p.i. The efficiency
of integration was defined as the amount of integrated viral DNA at 48 h
p.i. divided by the amount of viral DNA resulting from reverse
transcription (at 10 h p.i.). The results are expressed as the
percentages of the value obtained for the WT. The results in Figure 1
are the means ± SD (error bars) of three representative independent
experiments.

Open in new tab Download slide

In order to investigate the effect of these mutations on the early steps
of viral replication (viral entry, reverse transcription and
integration), we infected HeLa-P4 reporter cells expressing
β-galactosidase under the control of the viral Tat protein with
equivalent amounts of WT and mutant p24 ^gag^ antigen and measured the
β-galactosidase activity at 48 h p.i. The mutations affected viral
infectivity to different extents (Figure 1 b). In cells infected with
the G118R or F121Y mutants, β-galactosidase activity was significantly
lower than in cells infected with the WT virus (71% and 50% of the WT
activity for G118R and F121Y, respectively), reflecting a defect in
viral entry, reverse transcription or viral integration. However, this
defect was weak compared with that shown by the Q148K mutation, which
drastically disrupted viral infectivity (β-galactosidase expression was
10% of the WT activity). Similar findings were reported for the Y143R/C
and Q148H mutations conferring raltegravir resistance.
^\ \ 14\ ,\ \ \ 29^ The single E138K mutation had no effect on viral
infectivity because β-galactosidase expression was identical to that in
cells infected with the WT virus. Interestingly, the combination of the
E138K and the Q148K mutation resulted in the partial recovery (60% of
the WT activity) of the low viral infectivity observed in the Q148K
mutant. This recovery parallels that of the raltegravir-resistant
G140S/Q148H double mutant, ^\ \ 29^ where the G140S mutation was found
to rescue the defect of viral infectivity caused by the Q148H mutation.

Given that some mutations in IN influence the amount of
reverse-transcribed viral DNA, ^\ \ 33\ ,\ \ \ 34^ we next studied the
potential effect of the mutations on reverse transcription and viral
integration by quantifying the total viral DNA and integrated viral DNA
as previously described. ^\ \ 30^ Quantitative PCR was performed at
several timepoints p.i. in MT4 cells infected with viruses harbouring
the different mutations G118R, F121Y and the E138K/Q148K double mutant,
as well as the E138K and Q148K single mutants. At 10 h p.i., when
reverse transcription was complete, the amount of viral DNA was fairly
similar between cells infected with the different mutants, suggesting
that none of these mutations drastically impaired reverse transcription
activity (Figure 1 c). Most of the viral strains, with the notable
exception of the Q148K virus, were able to replicate, and cells infected
with these strains showed a significant increase in viral DNA load at 72
h p.i., which followed a transient decrease due to integration (between
24 and 48 h p.i. in the case of the WT virus). Indeed, at 72 h p.i.,
integration may occur leading to new infection cycles and,
concomitantly, to an increase in total viral DNA. Furthermore, we noted
a strong increase in viral DNA for the E138K mutant as soon as 48 h
p.i., highlighting the strong replicative capability of this mutant. By
contrast, the amount of viral DNA in cells infected with the Q148K virus
was low at 48 and 72 h p.i., confirming the severe defect in virus
replication as previously observed for the Q148H mutant. ^\ \ 29^ Taken
together, these data show that the E138K mutation improves viral fitness
and rescues the defect due to the Q148K mutation, leading to a
replicative and resistant strain, similar to that observed for the
G140S/Q148H double mutant.

We then quantified the integrated viral DNA at 48 h p.i. because the
reverse transcription step was not substantially altered in the
different viral strains (Figure 1 d). Except for the E138K mutant, all
the viral strains showed defects in integration but to different
extents. Integration was totally impaired in the Q148K mutant but was
partially restored by the E138K mutation in the double mutant. The
efficiency of integration was similar for the F121Y and the E138K/Q148K
mutants (34% and 42% of the WT value, respectively). The integration
efficiency of the G118R mutant was slightly lower than that of the WT
virus (81% of the value for the WT). These data are consistent with our
experiments involving HeLa-P4 reporter cells except for the E138K single
mutant (Figure 1 b). Indeed, the integration efficiency of the E138K
mutant was higher than that of the WT virus (by a factor of 3-fold)
whereas its β-galactosidase expression profile was similar to that of
the WT virus. However, the reverse transcriptase activity (total viral
DNA at 10 h p.i. in Figure 1 c) of the E138K mutant was lower than that
of the WT virus, with a comparable fold change (FC). This suggests that
the higher integration efficiency of the E138K mutant may compensate for
the low abundance of viral DNA reverse transcripts, leading to similar
β-galactosidase expression between HeLa-P4 reporter cells infected with
the E138K mutant or WT virus (Figure 1 b--d). Consistent with the
quantification results obtained for integrated viral DNA, only the p24
production by the Q148K mutant was severely impaired (p24 production
decreased by 6-fold; Supplementary Data ). Thus, mutations have no
crucial consequences for the dynamics of viral replication except for
the Q148K mutant.

### Comparative study of resistance profiles against raltegravir and dolutegravir in cell-based assays

After characterizing the replication capacities of the mutants, we
investigated the resistance of each strain to raltegravir and
dolutegravir by determining their EC ~50~ value in infected HeLa-P4
cells (the Q148K mutant was excluded due to its weak infectivity)
(Figure 2 a). The R263K mutant, which was previously identified by
Quashie *et al* . ^\ \ 24^ by *in vitro* selection, was used as an
example of a virus with poor resistance to dolutegravir. The EC ~50~
value for raltegravir of the WT virus was 10 nM, in accordance with
previous studies. ^\ \ 29^ The mutants displayed three types of response
in terms of raltegravir resistance (the FCs are reported in Table 1 ):
(i) the E138K mutant showed no resistance (EC ~50~ of 10 nM; FC = 1);
(ii) the F121Y and G118R single mutants both showed an intermediate
level of resistance (EC ~50~ of 100 and 200 nM, respectively; FC = 10
and 20, respectively); and (iii) the E138K/Q148K and G140S/Q148H double
mutants were highly resistant to raltegravir (EC ~50~ \>300 nM; FC
\>30).

Table 1.

Open in new tab

FCs in IC ~50~ and EC ~50~ of dolutegravir and raltegravir for each IN
mutant

.

G118R .

F121Y .

E138K .

Q148K .

E138K/Q148K .

R263K .

G140S/Q148H .

Dolutegravir IC ~50~

18 ± 3.1

5 ± 1.2

0.9 ± 0.1

5.4 ± 1.1

18.4 ± 3.2

ND

10 ± 2.4

Dolutegravir EC ~50~

20 ± 4.3

3.2 ± 1

1.1 ± 0.4

ND

120 ± 9.3

2 ± 0.1

4 ± 0.3

Raltegravir IC ~50~

10 ± 1.4

20 ± 2

1 ± 0.3

ND

100 ± 8.4

ND

100 ± 7.3

Raltegravir EC ~50~

20 ± 2.5

10 ± 2

1 ± 0.2

ND

\>30

ND

\>30

ND, not determined.

EC ~50~ values were obtained from cell culture assays and IC ~50~ values
were obtained from assays using recombinant IN proteins.

Each value represents the mean ± SD for three independent experiments.

Table 1.

Open in new tab

FCs in IC ~50~ and EC ~50~ of dolutegravir and raltegravir for each IN
mutant

.

G118R .

F121Y .

E138K .

Q148K .

E138K/Q148K .

R263K .

G140S/Q148H .

Dolutegravir IC ~50~

18 ± 3.1

5 ± 1.2

0.9 ± 0.1

5.4 ± 1.1

18.4 ± 3.2

ND

10 ± 2.4

Dolutegravir EC ~50~

20 ± 4.3

3.2 ± 1

1.1 ± 0.4

ND

120 ± 9.3

2 ± 0.1

4 ± 0.3

Raltegravir IC ~50~

10 ± 1.4

20 ± 2

1 ± 0.3

ND

100 ± 8.4

ND

100 ± 7.3

Raltegravir EC ~50~

20 ± 2.5

10 ± 2

1 ± 0.2

ND

\>30

ND

\>30

ND, not determined.

EC ~50~ values were obtained from cell culture assays and IC ~50~ values
were obtained from assays using recombinant IN proteins.

Each value represents the mean ± SD for three independent experiments.

Figure 2.

Resistance of IN mutants to dolutegravir (DTG) and raltegravir (RAL).
(a) HeLa-P4 cells were infected, in triplicate, with WT or mutant virus
(3 ng of p24 ^gag^ ) in the presence of increasing concentrations of DTG
or RAL. The CPRG assay was used to quantify β-galactosidase activity in
cell extracts 48 h p.i. The EC ~50~ corresponds to the concentration of
IN inhibitor required to inhibit β-galactosidase activity by 50% of its
value in untreated infected cells. DTG was used for the left and middle
panels. The symbols corresponding to each protein are shown in the
figures. DTG (white symbols) and RAL (black symbols) were used for the
experiment in the right panel. The data shown are the means ± SD (error
bars) of three independent experiments. The EC ~50~ (nM) values for DTG
and RAL are reported in the table below the panels. (b) The same
experiment described in Figure 1 (d) was conducted without (grey bars)
or with (black bars) 50 nM DTG. Integrated viral DNA was quantified 48 h
p.i. The ratio of integrated viral DNA was defined as the amount of
integrated viral DNA at 48 h p.i. divided by the amount of viral DNA
resulting from the reverse transcription. For each virus, the amount of
integrated viral DNA in the condition without DTG was defined as 100%
integration. The results in Figure 2 are the means ± SD (error bars) of
three representative independent experiments.

Open in new tab Download slide

Regarding resistance to dolutegravir, the EC ~50~ of dolutegravir for
the WT virus (2.5 nM) confirmed that this compound was a more potent IN
inhibitor than raltegravir (Figure 2 a). The calculated EC ~50~ values
for dolutegravir revealed that the different mutations could be
classified into three levels of resistance, as described for raltegravir
resistance (Figure 2 a). Dolutegravir inhibited E138K and R263K with an
EC ~50~ of 2.7 nM (FC = 1.1) and 5 nM (FC = 2), respectively, confirming
that E138K does not confer dolutegravir resistance and that R263K
displays poor resistance to dolutegravir, as described by Quashie *et
al* . ^\ \ 24^ The F121Y and G118R mutations conferred a stronger
resistance to dolutegravir (8 and 50 nM, and FC = 3 and 20,
respectively), although this was weaker than the resistance of the
E138K/Q148K mutant, which showed the strongest resistance to
dolutegravir (EC ~50~ of 300 nM, FC = 120), in agreement with other
studies. ^\ \ 22\ ,\ \ \ 23^ Notably, dolutegravir inhibited the
replication of the G140S/Q148H mutant with higher efficiency (EC ~50~
= 10 nM, FC = 4) and then displayed an intermediate profile of
resistance to dolutegravir whereas it was highly resistant to
raltegravir (see above). Thus, in contrast to E138K/Q148K, G140S/Q148H
displays differential susceptibility to dolutegravir/raltegravir,
meaning that dolutegravir but not raltegravir can discriminate between
E138K/Q148H and G140S/Q148H mutants. We observed a similar tendency for
F121Y.

The resistance of the E138K/Q148K double mutant to dolutegravir was
stronger than that of the G140S/Q148H virus. Moreover, both the G118R
and F121Y mutants, which were identified in clinical trials using
raltegravir, are resistant to dolutegravir, albeit to different extents.

We then assayed the resistance of all the mutants to dolutegravir by
measuring the efficiency of integration in the presence of 50 nM
dolutegravir (which fully inhibits the integration of the WT virus in
HeLa-cell-based assays) (Figure 2 b). No integrated viral DNA was
detected for WT and E138K, confirming that E138K is not involved in
dolutegravir resistance. Furthermore, for the three other mutants
(G118R, F121Y and E138K/Q148K), the amount of integrated DNA correlated
with the resistance factor measured in the HeLa-cell-based assay (see
Figure 2 ).

### Characterization of the 3′-processing and strand transfer activities of recombinant mutants

The above-mentioned mutations could affect the 3′-processing reaction
and/or the strand transfer reaction mediated by IN. We used a 21-mer DNA
substrate mimicking the blunt viral DNA end to investigate the effect of
the mutations on both activities of recombinant IN. Although the
3′-processing efficiency of both the F121Y and G118R mutants was
similar, it was significantly lower than that of the WT (43% of the WT
activity) (Figure 3 a, compare lanes 1, 11 and 21; and Figure 3 b, left
panel). After normalization in terms of the 3′-processing activity, we
found that the strand transfer efficiency of the G118R mutant was
similar to that of the WT and significantly higher than that of the
F121Y mutant (Figure 3 b, right panel). Thus, the G118R mutation impairs
the 3′-processing activity but not the strand transfer reaction. By
contrast, the F121Y mutation, which inhibited the 3′-processing reaction
to a similar extent to the G118R mutation, also showed a low strand
transfer reaction efficiency (Figure 3 b, right panel).

Figure 3.

Catalytic properties of WT, F121Y and G118R IN and resistance to
raltegravir (RAL) and dolutegravir (DTG). (a) The 3′-processing and
strand transfer activities of IN were assessed after 3 h of incubation
(37°C) with the unprocessed ODN (U5B) hybridized with U5A in the
presence of increasing concentrations of DTG (from 0.1 nM to 1 μM). The
unprocessed substrate (21-mer) is indicated, as are the 3′-processed
(19-mer) and strand transfer products. (b) Percentage of 3′-processing
(left panel) and strand transfer activities (right panel) without DTG.
The amount of 3′-processing product was normalized by the U5B/U5A
substrate. The amount of strand transfer product was normalized by the
amount of 3′-processing product of the reaction (19-mer). The results
are expressed as the percentages of the value obtained for the WT and
are the means ± SD (error bars) of three representative independent
experiments. (c) Strand transfer activity after 3 h of incubation (37°C)
with the 3′-processed ODN (U5B-2) hybridized with U5A in the presence of
increasing concentrations of DTG (from 0.1 nM to 1 μM) (left panel). The
percentage of strand transfer activity as a function of DTG
concentration is shown in the right panel. The results are expressed as
percentages of the value obtained for the condition without DTG. The IC
~50~ of the WT and the mutants for RAL and DTG are reported in the table
below the gel images. The results are the means ± SD (error bars) of
three representative independent experiments. The gels shown are
representative of three independent experiments.

Open in new tab Download slide

An impairment of 3′-processing activity may be due to a defect in the
catalytic activity or DNA binding of IN. To distinguish between these
two possibilities, we performed fluorescence anisotropy experiments to
study the DNA-binding properties of IN. Only G118R IN showed an
impairment in DNA binding (44% lower than WT IN; Supplementary Data ),
suggesting that the defect in 3′-processing observed for this mutant was
due to a defect in its ability to bind DNA. F121Y and WT IN bound DNA
with a similar affinity, suggesting that the low 3′-processing and
strand transfer activities of the F121Y mutant are the result of a
defect in its catalytic properties.

We also performed strand transfer experiments with a 3′-processed DNA
substrate to overcome the effects of mutation on the 3′-processing
reaction. ^\ \ 35^ As described above, the strand transfer efficiency of
the G118R mutant was similar to that of the WT and higher than that of
the F121Y mutant (Figure 3 c, compare left panel, lanes 1, 11 and 21).
The weak strand transfer reaction efficiency found *in vitro* for the
F121Y mutant is consistent with the poor integration of this mutant into
the genome of MT4 cells (see Figure 1 d).

The G140S/Q148H mutant was previously reported to be highly resistant to
raltegravir. ^\ \ 29\ ,\ \ \ 36^ The Q148H mutation was responsible for
raltegravir resistance and the detrimental effect of this mutation on
the overall IN activity was restored by the G140S mutation. We also
analysed the effect of single E138K and Q148K mutations as well as that
of the E138K/Q148K double mutation on IN activity. The 3′-processing
activity of the E138K mutant was similar to that of the WT (around 80%
of WT activity) after 3 h of incubation at 37°C (Figure 4 a, left panel,
grey bars). Under the same conditions, the 3′-processing activities of
the Q148K and the E138K/Q148K mutants were severely impaired (3% and 11%
of the WT activity for Q148K and E138K/Q148K, respectively).
Interestingly, increasing the incubation time at 37°C up to 24 h led to
a partial recovery of the 3′-processing activity for the E138K/Q148K
mutant (37% of the WT activity) but not for the Q148K mutant (Figure 4
a, left panel, black bars). Furthermore, when the strand transfer was
normalized by the 3′-processing activity and expressed as a percentage
of the WT, the strand transfer activity of the E138K and E138K/Q148K
mutants was slightly higher than that of the WT virus, whereas the
strand transfer activity of the Q148K mutant was similar to that of the
WT virus (Figure 4 a, right panel). It has previously been suggested
that the inactive-to-active transition, which characterizes IN binding
to DNA, accounts for the slow single turnover rate constant of the
3′-processing reaction. ^\ \ 37^

Figure 4.

Influence of the Q148 pathway on IN activity and INSTI resistance. (a)
WT and IN mutants were incubated with the U5B/U5A DNA substrate for 3 h
(grey bars) or 24 h (black bars) at 37°C. The 3′-processing activity was
quantified as described in the Methods section (left panel). The amount
of strand transfer product was normalized by the amount of 3′-processing
product of the reaction. The results are expressed as the percentages of
the value obtained for the WT (right panel) and are the means ± SD
(error bars) of three representative independent experiments. (b) Strand
transfer activity using the 3′-processed substrate as indicated in the
legend of Figure 3 (c) and increasing concentrations of dolutegravir
(DTG) (from 0.3 to 333 nM). Strand transfer products are indicated, as
is the 19-mer substrate (U5B-2 hybridized with U5A) (left panel). The
percentage of strand transfer activity (obtained from the gel shown) was
obtained after normalization by the substrate and is expressed as a
percentage of the value obtained for each IN without DTG. One
representative experiment out of five is shown. The IC ~50~ of each
mutant is shown in the table below the gel.

Open in new tab Download slide

### Comparative in vitro study of mutants resistant to raltegravir and dolutegravir

After showing that the mutants exhibit different levels of resistance to
raltegravir and dolutegravir in a cellular model, we next characterized
the resistances of these mutants using biochemical approaches. First,
dolutegravir did not significantly inhibit the 3′-processing reaction
*in vitro* (Figure 3 a), as expected for an INSTI compound and
consistent with previous observations for raltegravir.
^\ \ 38\ ,\ \ \ 39^ We then used 3′-processed DNA in the presence of
increasing concentrations of dolutegravir to investigate dolutegravir
resistance (Figure 3 c and Figure 4 b) and compared it with raltegravir
resistance under the same conditions (Figure 3 c, bottom, and Figure 4
b, bottom). Both the F121Y and G118R mutants were resistant to
raltegravir and dolutegravir (IC ~50,raltegravir~ 160 and 80 nM, IC
~50,dolutegravir~ 25 and 90 nM, respectively) whereas the WT virus was
susceptible to these compounds (IC ~50,raltegravir~ 8 nM, IC
~50,dolutegravir~ 5 nM) (Figure 3 c and Figure 4 b). Thus, both mutants
showed moderate resistance to raltegravir and dolutegravir \[FC
~raltegravir~ 20 and 10, FC ~dolutegravir~ 5 and 18, for F121Y and
G118R, respectively (Table 1 )\]. These data are in accordance with
results obtained from the HeLa-cell-based assay (see Figure 2 and Table
1 ). We also confirmed that E138K was not associated with raltegravir or
dolutegravir resistance, in contrast to the Q148K and E138K/Q148K
mutants (IC ~50,raltegravir~ 800 nM for E138K/Q148K in comparison with
WT IC ~50~ 8 nM, and IC ~50,dolutegravir~ 27 and 92 nM for Q148K and
E138K/Q148K, respectively, in comparison with WT IC ~50~ 5 nM) (Figure 4
b and Table 1 ). These values are consistent with those found in the
HeLa-cell based assay. These findings thus confirm that: (i) the
resistance of E138K/Q148K to raltegravir and dolutegravir is higher than
that of F121Y and G118R, and (ii) G140S/Q148H and F121Y appear to
display differential susceptibility to raltegravir and dolutegravir.

These results are in accordance with previous reports demonstrating that
the activities of N155H/S/T, Y143C/H/R and Q148H INs and to a lesser
extent that of the Q148K/R mutants, which are involved in raltegravir
resistance, are inhibited by dolutegravir. ^\ \ 40\ ,\ \ \ 41^
Interestingly, the G118R and F121Y INs, which were previously described
in patients failing raltegravir treatment, showed resistance to both
raltegravir and dolutegravir *in vitro* . Moreover, the level of
resistance of the G118R mutant to dolutegravir was higher than that of
the F121Y mutant, which suggests that G118R is involved in dolutegravir
resistance.


## Discussion

The need for the integration step for HIV-1 replication has led to the
development of anti-IN compounds. Although raltegravir and elvitegravir
have shown potency in clinical practice, many reports have described the
emergence of raltegravir and elvitegravir resistance involving three
main pathways with the residues Y143, Q148 and N155.
^\ \ 14\ ,\ \ \ 29\ ,\ \ \ 42\ ,\ \ \ 43^ Dolutegravir was recently
approved by the US FDA and belongs to the second generation of
inhibitors targeting IN. The VIKING trial demonstrated that dolutegravir
is efficient against most of the viruses resistant to raltegravir or
elvitegravir but is ineffective against viruses harbouring Q148 pathway
mutations with a secondary mutation such as G140, L74 or E138. ^\ \ 40^

In this study, we characterized two novel mutations described in
patients failing raltegravir treatment: G118R and F121Y. We investigated
the resistance of these mutants to raltegravir and dolutegravir in
relation to other well-known mutations involved in
raltegravir-resistance pathways. Mutant strains could be divided into
three different groups based on their level of resistance to
dolutegravir: the first group included only the E138K mutation, which
was not resistant; the second one encompassed the G118R and F121Y
mutations, which showed an intermediate level of resistance; and the
third one comprised mutants such as the E138K/Q148K double mutant with
strong resistance. Interestingly, the level of resistance of some
mutants depended on the INSTI studied. This was exemplified in our study
by the G140S/Q148H and the F121Y mutants, which showed differential
resistance to raltegravir and dolutegravir.

This is also the case for the well-established raltegravir-resistant
Y143 and N155 pathways that were poorly resistant to dolutegravir (FC
\<1.9). ^\ \ 23^ A structural study performed by Hare *et al* . ^\ \ 44^
on primate foamy virus (PFV) IN has to some extent revealed the
relationship between the intasome structure and differential resistance
to INSTIs. Only raltegravir establishes a π-π stacking interaction
between its oxadiazole ring and the Y143 residue, which is required for
its stability in the intasome. By contrast, dolutegravir does not
establish such a stable π-π interaction, explaining why dolutegravir,
but not raltegravir, remains active against the Y143H mutant. In the
case of the N155H mutant, the His residue at position 155 forms an
interaction with the phosphate group of the 3′-adenosine of the
processed DNA. The resistance of the N155H mutant to raltegravir is
explained by the incapability of raltegravir to disrupt this
interaction. By contrast, dolutegravir disrupts the His--phosphate
interaction, which renders this mutant susceptible to dolutegravir.
^\ \ 44^

The Q148 pathway belongs to the third group of resistance, i.e. highly
resistant to dolutegravir. Importantly, the Q148H/K mutation is often
associated with a secondary mutation such as E138K or G140S. Indeed, the
inactive-to-active transition is strongly impaired by the Q148K mutation
and this defect can be partially reversed by the E138K mutation. This
situation is similar to that previously described for the G140S/Q148H
mutant. ^\ \ 29^ Thus, the Q148K mutation dramatically impairs the
3′-processing activity but not the strand transfer reaction, suggesting
that direct binding of IN to the 3′-processed DNA substrate overcomes
this limiting transition step. The Q148 residue plays a key role in this
transition that occurs on the blunt DNA substrate and allows
3′-processing. These secondary mutations rescue the impaired activity of
the Q148H/K single mutant but they also enhance resistance to some
extent; although these mutants alone are neutral in terms of resistance,
the resistance of double mutants to INSTIs is consistently higher than
that of the Q148H/K mutant alone. Remarkably, the G140S/Q148H double
mutant showed differential resistance to raltegravir and dolutegravir
whereas this difference was less pronounced for the E138K/Q148K double
mutant: the G140S/Q148K mutant was strongly resistant to raltegravir but
displayed lower resistance to dolutegravir, whereas the E138K/Q148K
mutant showed strong resistance to both compounds. We wondered whether
this difference was due to the nature of the mutation at position 148 (H
versus K) or to the position of the secondary mutation (position 138
versus 140). However, no structural data are available regarding the
differential effect of mutations at position Q148 (only the structure of
the Q148H mutation is available ^\ \ 20^ ). Moreover, structural studies
have been performed with the PFV-1 intasome, where the equivalent of the
residue G140 in HIV-1 IN is S209 (the PFV S217H single mutant is thus
equivalent to the HIV-1 G140S/Q148H double mutant) and the effect of
mutation at position 138 has not yet been explored. ^\ \ 20^
Consequently, it is not possible to use this structure to study Q148H/K
mutants and the influence of any mutation at the 138 or 140 position.
However, functional studies have investigated the role of amino acid
substitutions involved in the Q148 pathway in a systematic manner.
^\ \ 23^ Given that E138K/Q148H and G140S/Q148K are either poorly or not
resistant to dolutegravir, ^\ \ 23^ it appears that both the nature of
the mutation at position 148 (K\>H) and the position of the secondary
mutation itself (position 138) are important for determining resistance
against dolutegravir. Therefore, the unique combination of the two
mutations, E138K and Q148K, confers strong resistance to dolutegravir.

The G118R and F121Y mutations belong to the second group, which is
associated with an intermediate level of resistance. Here, we used
biochemical and virological assays to show that these two mutations,
which occurred in patients failing raltegravir treatment, are associated
with dolutegravir resistance (20-fold and 3.2-fold for G118R and F121Y,
respectively). The G118R mutation, which was first selected *in vitro*
against another second-generation inhibitor, MK-2048, ^\ \ 17^ was
suggested to be specific for second-generation INSTIs. However, our
study shows that this mutation, which is found in raltegravir-treated
patients, displays a similar resistance profile against raltegravir and
dolutegravir and therefore does not confer differential susceptibility
to the two compounds. By contrast, our data show that F121Y displays
differential susceptibility to raltegravir and dolutegravir, similar to
our findings with the G140S/Q148H mutant. Both residues, G118 and F121,
are located in the vicinity of S119, which is essential for the
interaction with the target DNA. ^\ \ 45^ Although the 3′-processing
efficiency of both the F121Y and G118R mutants is lower than that of WT
IN, only the F121Y mutant is characterized by a low strand transfer
reaction efficiency. This finding, based on *in vitro* assays involving
recombinant proteins, is consistent with results obtained in cell-based
assays (integration assays), which showed that the integration
efficiency of the F121Y mutant was lower than that of the G118R mutant.
This suggests that the residue at position 121 is more important for the
target DNA-binding site than the residue at position 118, because
mutation at position 121 severely impairs the strand transfer reaction
and differentially modulates INSTI resistance.

Overall, our data show that G118R and F121Y represent new
raltegravir-resistance pathways that may also be involved in
dolutegravir resistance (G118\>F121). Furthermore, the Q148 pathway,
which was previously described as being involved in raltegravir and
elvitegravir resistance, is involved in dolutegravir resistance when
associated with E138K, especially when the Q residue is replaced with a
K. Thus, these profiles need to be monitored in the future in patients
treated with dolutegravir.


## Funding

We are grateful to the Agence Nationale de Recherche sur le Sida et les
Hépatites for providing financial support for this research (ANRS, No
EOTP 342901 to O.D.).


## Transparency declarations

None to declare.


## Author notes

†

These authors equally contributed to the work.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com


## Supplementary data

Supplementary Data  - zip file

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

### Citations

26

CITATIONS

### Views

1,034

### Altmetric

More metrics information

### Email alerts

Article activity alert

Advance article alerts

New issue alert

Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic

### Recommended

1.  Resistance to integrase inhibitors: a national study in
HIV-1-infected treatment-naive and -experienced patients

Anne-Genevieve Marcelin et al., Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, 2019

2.  Accumulation of integrase strand transfer inhibitor resistance
mutations confers high-level resistance to dolutegravir in non-B
subtype HIV-1 strains from patients failing raltegravir in Uganda

Emmanuel Ndashimye et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
2020

3.  A systematic review of the genetic mechanisms of dolutegravir
resistance

Soo-Yon Rhee et al., Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 2019

1.  Editor\'s IntroductionComics and History

McClancy et al., Feminist Media Histories, 2018

2.  Is a Non-Capitalist World Imaginable? Embodied Practices and
Slipstream Potentials in Amanda Strong's Biidaaban

Matthew Harrison Tedford, Feminist Media Histories, 2022

3.  Sighting the SoundA Latina Punk Challenge to Musical Memory

Paloma Martínez-Cruz, Feminist Media Histories, 2021

Powered by

### Citing articles via

Web of Science (23)

Google Scholar

-   ### Latest

-   ### Most Read

-   ### Most Cited

Professor Alasdair Macintosh Geddes, 14 May 1934--9 April 2024

Imipenem reduces the efficacy of vancomycin against *Elizabethkingia*
species

Implication of genotypes for prognosis of *Candida glabrata* bloodstream
infections

Characterization of a case of virological failure after switch to
long-acting cabotegravir and rilpivirine

The novel 2024 WHO *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* reference strains for global
quality assurance of laboratory investigations and superseded WHO *N.
gonorrhoeae* reference strains---phenotypic, genetic and reference
genome characterization

More from Oxford Academic

Clinical Medicine

Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics

Infectious Diseases

Medical Microbiology and Virology

Medicine and Health

Pathology

Books

Journals

Advertisement intended for healthcare professionals

close advertisement

-   About Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
-   Editorial Board
-   Author Guidelines
-   Contact BSAC
-   Facebook

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Twitter
-   Purchase
-   Recommend to your Library
-   Advertising and Corporate Services
-   Journals Career Network

-   Online ISSN 1460-2091
-   Print ISSN 0305-7453
-   Copyright © 2024 British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy

-   About Oxford Academic
-   Publish journals with us
-   University press partners
-   What we publish
-   New features

-   Authoring
-   Open access
-   Purchasing
-   Institutional account management
-   Rights and permissions

-   Get help with access
-   Accessibility
-   Contact us
-   Advertising
-   Media enquiries

-   Oxford University Press
-   News
-   Oxford Languages
-   University of Oxford

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It
furthers the University\'s objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide

-   Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press
-   Cookie settings
-   Cookie policy
-   Privacy policy
-   Legal notice

PDF Help


**Figure 1 not found**

**Figure 2 not found**

**Figure 3 not found**

**Figure 4 not found**



## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th>    .   </th><th>    G118R    .   </th><th>    F121Y    .   </th><th>    E138K    .   </th><th>    Q148K    .   </th><th>    E138K/Q148K    .   </th><th>    R263K    .   </th><th>    G140S/Q148H    .   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Dolutegravir IC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   18 ± 3.1  </td><td>   5 ± 1.2  </td><td>   0.9 ± 0.1  </td><td>   5.4 ± 1.1  </td><td>   18.4 ± 3.2  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   10 ± 2.4  </td></tr><tr><td>   Dolutegravir EC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   20 ± 4.3  </td><td>   3.2 ± 1  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.4  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   120 ± 9.3  </td><td>   2 ± 0.1  </td><td>   4 ± 0.3  </td></tr><tr><td>   Raltegravir IC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   10 ± 1.4  </td><td>   20 ± 2  </td><td>   1 ± 0.3  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   100 ± 8.4  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   100 ± 7.3  </td></tr><tr><td>   Raltegravir EC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   20 ± 2.5  </td><td>   10 ± 2  </td><td>   1 ± 0.2  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   &gt;30  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   &gt;30  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th>    .   </th><th>    G118R    .   </th><th>    F121Y    .   </th><th>    E138K    .   </th><th>    Q148K    .   </th><th>    E138K/Q148K    .   </th><th>    R263K    .   </th><th>    G140S/Q148H    .   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Dolutegravir IC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   18 ± 3.1  </td><td>   5 ± 1.2  </td><td>   0.9 ± 0.1  </td><td>   5.4 ± 1.1  </td><td>   18.4 ± 3.2  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   10 ± 2.4  </td></tr><tr><td>   Dolutegravir EC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   20 ± 4.3  </td><td>   3.2 ± 1  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.4  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   120 ± 9.3  </td><td>   2 ± 0.1  </td><td>   4 ± 0.3  </td></tr><tr><td>   Raltegravir IC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   10 ± 1.4  </td><td>   20 ± 2  </td><td>   1 ± 0.3  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   100 ± 8.4  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   100 ± 7.3  </td></tr><tr><td>   Raltegravir EC   <sub>    50   </sub></td><td>   20 ± 2.5  </td><td>   10 ± 2  </td><td>   1 ± 0.2  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   &gt;30  </td><td>   ND  </td><td>   &gt;30  </td></tr></table>



