# HIV-1 Diversity and Drug-Resistant Mutations in Infected Individuals in Changchun, China

Ming Yan , ^\#^ ^1^ Ke Zhao , ^\#^ ^1^ Juan Du , ^1^ Linzhang Li , ^1^
Donglin Wu , ^2^ Shengming Xu , ^1^ Xiangchao Zeng , ^1^ Guanjun Wang ,
^1\ ,^ ^\*^ and Xiao-Fang Yu ^1\ ,^ ^3\ ,^ ^\*^

Shan Cen, Editor

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer


## Associated Data

Data Availability Statement

:



## Abstract

### Objectives

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection has been detected
in all provinces of China. Although epidemiological and phylogenetic
studies have been conducted in many regions, such analyses are lacking
from Jilin province in northeastern China.

### Method

Epidemiological and phylogenetic analyses, as well as detection of
drug-resistant mutations, were conducted on 57 HIV-1 infected patients
from Changchun city identified and confirmed through annual surveillance
by local Centers for Disease Control in Jilin province of northeastern
China in 2012.

### Results

Sexual contact was determined to be the major pathway for HIV-1
transmission in Jilin, where hetero- and homosexual activities
contributed almost equally. Phylogenetic analyses detected multiple
subtypes of HIV-1 including subtype G circulating in Jilin, with
multiple origins for each of them. Both subtype B and CRF01_AE were
dominant, and evidence of subtype B transmitting between different
high-risk groups was observed. Mutations in the viral protease at
position 71 indicated the presence of a selective pressure. Several
drug-resistant mutations were detected, although they were predicted
with low-level resistance to antiviral treatments.

### Conclusions

Information from this study fills the gap in knowledge of HIV-1
transmission in Changchun city, Jilin province, China. By revealing the
origin and evolutionary status of local HIV-1 strains, this work
contributes to ongoing efforts in the control and prevention of AIDS.



## Introduction

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) has continued to cause a
global epidemic since its discovery in the early 1980s \[1\] . The
prevalence of HIV-1 in China has also been increasing in recent years
\[2\] . Although many HIV-1 surveillance studies have been conducted in
different regions of China \[3\] -- \[9\] , only a few cases in
northeastern China were reported \[10\] , \[11\] , and the current
transmission status of HIV-1 in Jilin province remains unknown.

Several pathways are associated with HIV-1 transmission. Injection drug
use (IDU) was once the dominant route for the spread of HIV-1 in China
\[3\] , \[12\] , especially between the adjacent Yunnan and Guangxi
provinces. However, recent studies revealed that sexual activities have
become the major pathway for HIV-1 transmission \[13\] -- \[15\] ,
particularly among homosexual partners (or men who have sex with men,
MSM) due to their secrecy, low awareness of the need for protection and
difficulties in receiving intervention. In addition, infected paid blood
donors (PBD) were discovered in Henan and Hubei provinces \[14\] ,
\[16\] , and subtype B HIV-1 strains were found to be highly dominant
among this high-risk group throughout the country \[8\] , \[17\] .
Previous studies suggested that HIV-1 has been cross-transmitted among
high-risk groups \[18\] , which provides greater opportunities for the
generation of circulating recombinant forms (CRF) of the virus and
increases difficulties for control and prevention efforts.

In this study, an epidemiological survey of 57 HIV-1 infected
individuals from Changchun city in Jilin province of northeastern China
indicated that sexual contact was the major pathway for local HIV-1
transmission, while phylogenetic analyses on 35 HIV-1 strains revealed
that subtype B and CRF01_AE were dominant. The sequences were also
screened for drug-resistant mutations. Information gained from the
observed transmission patterns among high-risk groups in this region and
evidence of selective pressure may be applied towards improving
treatment and prevention strategies.



## Materials and Methods

### Ethics Statement

Written informed consent was obtained from each participant involved in
the study. This study was reviewed and approved by the institutional
review board of the First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun city,
Jilin province, China.

### Study Subjects

HIV-1-positive subjects from Changchun city in Jilin province, China,
were identified and confirmed through annual surveillance by the local
Centers for Disease Control in 2012. After pretest counseling, 57 of
them participated in this study with informed consent, and their
personal identifiable information was encoded. Questionnaires completed
by the participants provided demographic and behavioral information. All
enrolled patients had previously received antiviral treatments. Blood
samples were collected in 2012 and stored at −70°C.

### HIV-1 Subtyping by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Sequencing

DNA samples corresponding to 1×10 ^5^ uncultured peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from HIV-1-positive individuals were retrieved
using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to
manufacturer's protocol and subjected to PCR. The primers GAG-POL-F1,
5′-GTCCAAAATGCRAAYCCAGA-3′ (nt 1756--1775, positions corresponding to
HXB2) and GAG-POL-R1 5′-TGGAGYTCATAHCCCATCCA-3′ (nt 3234--3253) were
used in the first-round PCR reaction under the following conditions:
95°C for 5 min, 25 cycles at 94°C for 30 sec, 55°C for 30 sec and 72°C
for 1.5 min. A sample (5 µl) of the first-round PCR product was used in
the 50-µL second-round reaction mixture containing: 2.5 mM
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate, 10× PCR buffer (Mg ^2+^ Plus, with 15
mM Mg ^2+^ ), 5 U/µl Taq DNA polymerase (TaKaRa, DR100A) and 20 µM
inter-nested primers for GAG-POL-F2 *5′-ACAGCATGTCAGGGAGTGG-3′* (nt
1831--1849) and GAG-POL-R2 *5′-ATTGCTGGTGATCCTTTCCA-3′* (nt 3006--3025).
Cycling conditions were 95°C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles at 94°C
for 30 sec, 61.6°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 1.5 min.

### DNA Purification and Sequencing

PCR products were purified for sequencing by using the QIAquick PCR
purification kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocols.
Sequencing of PCR products was performed by Sangon Biotech Ltd.
Co.(Shanghai, China) with an automated sequencer (PRISM automated
sequencer, version 3100; ABI, Foster City, CA). For an internal control,
a random selection of 25% of the samples was re-amplified, sequenced and
analyzed. Identical sequences were retrieved from the control group and
compared to previous sequencing results.

### Alignment and Phylogenetic Analysis

DNA alignments were performed by the ClustalW method under MEGA5 \[19\]
, followed by manual adjustment. Reference sequences were retrieved from
the Los Alamos National Laboratory HIV Sequence Database (
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov ). Phylogenetic analysis was also conducted with
MEGA5. Neighbor-joining trees were constructed using a Kimura
2-parameter model and tested by the bootstrap method with 1,000
replicates. Bootscanning analysis was also performed with Simplot 3.5.1
\[20\] to detect potential recombination events.

### Drug Resistance Analysis

All Gag/Pol protein sequences were submitted to the HIV Drug Resistance
Database at Stanford University ( http://hivdb.stanford.edu/ ) to detect
potential resistant mutations against anti-HIV drugs.



## Results

### Study Population

In this study, 57 HIV-1-positive patients, including 47 males and 10
females from Changchun city in Jilin province, China, were identified
and confirmed through annual surveillance by local Centers for Disease
Control in 2012. Among all 57 patients, 27 were infected through MSM, 23
through heterosexual activity, 6 through PBD and 1 through IDU. Thus,
sexual activity (87.72% in total) was the major pathway for HIV-1
transmission in Changchun. Unlike in southern cities, IDU did not
contribute significantly to HIV-1 transmission, which was similar to
other northern areas \[10\] .

### Phylogenetic Analysis of Jilin HIV-1 Strains

Overall, 35 HIV-1 *gag/pol* sequences (positions 1831--3025
corresponding to HXB2) were successfully retrieved from the 57 samples.
Phylogenetic analysis of these amplified *gag/pol* sequences revealed
several subtypes circulating in Changchun ( Figure 1 ). Subtype B and
CRF01_AE were both dominant, each with the same ratio of 37.14% (13 out
of 35) ( Table 1 ). Other HIV-1 subtypes were also detected in Changchun
( Figure 1 and Table 1 ). Four sequences were identified as CRF07_BC,
three as subtype C and one as subtype CRF08_BC, leaving sequence JL2012
confirmed as subtype G.

Figure 1

**Phylogenetic analysis of *gag/pol* region (HXB2 1831--3025) of HIV-1
samples from Jilin province.**

The tree was constructed with MEGA5, using the Kimura-2 parameter model
and the bootstrap method with 1,000 replicates. Only values above 70%
are shown. Symbols indicate transmission through heterosexual activity
(♦), homosexual activity (▪), blood donation (•) or IDU (▴).

### Table 1

**Demographic information and virus classification for HIV-1 positive
patients from Changchun city ^\*^ .**

Patient ID

Gender

Age

Transmission Pathway

HIV-1 Subtype

JL1001

Male

33

Blood donation

B

JL1002

Male

37

Blood donation

B

JL1009

Female

37

Blood donation

B

JL1013

Male

46

Blood donation

B

JL1014

Male

36

Heterosexual activity

B

JL1024

Male

39

Heterosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL1030

Female

30

Blood donation

B

JL1035

Male

37

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL1038

Female

42

Heterosexual activity

B

JL1041

Male

42

Heterosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL1057

Male

34

Heterosexual activity

B

JL1062

Male

52

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL1064

Male

34

Homosexual activity

B

JL1067

Female

36

Heterosexual activity

B

JL2005

Male

35

Heterosexual activity

C ^\*\*^

JL2006

Female

27

Heterosexual activity

C ^\*\*^

JL2012

Female

29

Heterosexual activity

G

JL2027

Male

41

Heterosexual activity

B

JL2036

Male

54

Homosexual activity

CRF07_BC

JL2048

Male

29

Heterosexual activity

C

JL2061

Male

57

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL2065

Male

34

Heterosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL2072

Male

35

Homosexual activity

B

JL2076

Male

23

Injection drug uses

CRF07_BC

JL2084

Male

48

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3019

Male

38

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3028

Male

38

Homosexual activity

CRF07_BC

JL3038

Male

52

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3050

Male

44

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3055

Female

34

Heterosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3059

Male

39

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3071

Male

35

Homosexual activity

CRF01_AE

JL3085

Male

45

Homosexual activity

CRF07_BC

JL3087

Male

35

Heterosexual activity

CRF08_BC

JL3088

Male

54

Homosexual activity

B

Open in a separate window

\*Only patients with positive *gag/pol* sequences are listed.

\*\*JL2005 and JL2006 were later determined as CRF61_BC.

### Origin Analysis for each HIV-1 Subtype in Changchun City, Jilin Province

From the phylogenetic analysis, subtype B strains formed two clusters,
B1 and B2, with 100% bootstrap value for each ( Figure 1 ). All HIV-1
strains retrieved from PBDs were clustered in B1, suggesting that a
transmission pathway still exists among this high-risk group.
Consistently, BLAST analysis ( http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi )
indicated that this cluster originated from Henan province where an
outbreak of HIV-1 infection once occurred among PBDs (data not shown).
However, three strains also were transmitted through heterosexual
activities in this same B1 cluster, indicating the presence of HIV-1
transmission between PBDs and people infected through heterosexual
contact.

Besides subtype B, CRF01_AE was the other dominant subtype in Changchun
city ( Figure 1 ). It was also separated into two clusters, AE1 and AE2,
each of which indicated transmission between people participating in
homo- or heterosexual activities. Since the transmission pattern was
similar for AE1 and AE2 (both through sexual activities), the formation
of different clusters for this one subtype possibly indicated different
origins for these strains. Indeed, BLAST analysis of strains from
cluster AE1 revealed a high level of similarity (\>97%) with other HIV-1
sequences from the neighboring province of Liaoning, which is located to
the south of Jilin province. On the other hand, analysis of AE2 strains
suggested an HIV-1 origin from a more distant area in China, such as
Guangxi province or even from regions abroad (i.e., Vietnam or
Thailand), with a maximum identity greater than 96%.

Previously, a unique in-frame deletion was found in the p6 domain of
CRF07_BC sequences that was absent from CRF08_BC and CRF01_AE sequences
\[21\] , \[22\] . In this study, among all four *gag/pol* sequences
retrieved from CRF07_BC strains in Changchun city, a 7-aa deletion
(IDKELYP, according to the HXB2 sequence) could be detected in three of
them ( Figure 2 ). JL2076 as the only CRF07_BC sequence with an intact
p6 region and that was transmitted through IDU, clustered with the
reference sequence 98CN009, suggesting that it originated from Xinjiang
province \[23\] . Furthermore, JL2036 and JL3085 formed a cluster with
high bootstrap value (\>93%) ( Figure 1 ) and were found to originate
from Beijing based on the BLAST results. JL3028 did not show a clear
origin, but it was from either Beijing or Liaoning. Thus, the analysis
indicated that CRF07_BC was introduced to Jilin province from multiple
sources.

Figure 2

**Alignment of p6 amino acid sequences retrieved from HIV-1 strains in
Jilin province.**

The alignment was performed with MEGA5, followed by manual adjustment.

Interestingly, JL2048 (subtype C) was found to originate from Yunnan,
where HIV-1 subtype C is currently no longer dominant and rarely
detected. However, BLAST results of JL2005 and JL2006, which were
classified as subtype C during the initial phylogenetic analysis, showed
extremely high similarity (\>98% identity) to recently reported
sequences of CRF61_BC \[24\] . The classification of JL2005 and JL2006
as this newly emerged circulating recombinant form CRF61_BC was further
confirmed with phylogenetic tree construction ( Figure 3 ).

Figure 3

**Phylogenetic analysis of *gag/pol* region (HXB2 2283--3025) of JL2005
and JL2006 from Jilin province.**

The tree was constructed with MEGA5, using the Kimura-2 parameter model
and bootstrap method with 1,000 replicates. Only values above 70% are
shown. JL2005 and JL2006 are assigned the symbol •. Besides subtype P as
the outlier, only CRF61_BC reference sequences and detected HIV-1
subtypes in Jilin ( Figure 1 ) are included.

Several subtype G strains previously were detected in the provinces of
Yunnan, Shandong, Guangdong, Guangxi and Liaoning \[25\] -- \[28\] .
However, BLAST analysis of JL2012 showed 95% similarity with multiple
sequences from Liberia and Ghana, and only 89% with the one sequence
from Liaoning province, which is adjacent to Jilin province.
Phylogenetic analysis with subtype G sequences retrieved from GenBank
also confirmed that JL2012 had no closer relationship with other Chinese
subtype G strains ( Figure 4 ).

Figure 4

**Phylogenetic analysis of *gag/pol* region (HXB2 2283--3025) of HIV-1
samples from Jilin province.**

The tree was constructed with MEGA5, using the Kimura-2 parameter model
and bootstrap method with 1,000 replicates. Only values above 70% are
shown. JL2012 is assigned the symbol •, while other subtype G strains
from China are indicated with ▪. Clusters with no HIV-1 strains from
China are compressed.

### Analysis of Drug-resistant Mutations

All patients enrolled in this study had received antiviral treatments.
Therefore, all sequenced *gag/pol* sequences were submitted to the HIV
Drug Resistance Database at Stanford University (
http://hivdb.stanford.edu/ ) to detect potential mutations conferring
resistance against anti-HIV drugs. In total, ten retrieved sequences
(28.57%) were detected with possible drug-resistant mutations against
either protease inhibitors (PI) or reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitors
( Table 2 ). Six sequences were detected with possible PI resistance
mutations, five of which occurred at position 71 of the viral protease
sequence and led to no obvious drug resistance; meanwhile, one sequence
had a replacement of V10 with I, which is associated with low level
resistance to nelfinavir. As for RT resistance mutations, two sequences
were confirmed with mutations such as A62V or K70R against nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), while several non-NRTI (NNRTI)
resistance mutations were detected. JL2048 and JL3087 contained
mutations at E138 of the viral RT, leading to drug resistance of varying
degrees. Notably, due to the undetermined nucleotide, JL1009 contains a
mutation K101DEHN, which is highly selected by NNRTI treatment. Other
detected mutations, such as V106I and K103Q, are selected by some
antiviral drugs, yet no drug resistance has been linked with these
mutations.

### Table 2

**Antiviral drug resistance mutations detected in HIV-1 samples from
Changchun.**

Patient ID

Anti-HIV-1 Drug Uses

Antiviral Drug Resistance Mutations

PI

NRTI

NNRTI

JL1001

D4T, 3TC, NVP

A71V

JL1002

D4T, DDI, NVP

V106I

JL1009

D4T, 3TC, NVP

A71T

A62V

K101DEHN

JL1013

AZT, 3TC, EFV

A71T

K70R

JL1014

D4T, DDI, NVP

K103Q

JL1038

D4T, 3TC, NVP

A71T

JL1067

D4T, DDI, EFV

A71V

JL2012

D4T, DDI, NVP

L10I

JL2048

D4T, DDI, NVP

E138G

JL3087

D4T, 3TC, NVP

E138A

Open in a separate window



## Discussion

Due to the low rate of HIV-1 transmission in the region studied, only 57
HIV-1 patients from Changchun city were involved in this study.
Nevertheless, it provides for the first time important information on
the HIV-1 epidemiological pattern within the area of Jilin province. In
addition to the most common subtype B in northern China, several other
subtypes such as C, G, CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC, CRF08_BC and even the novel
CRF61_BC were detected among the HIV-1 samples collected in northeastern
China. The predominant subtypes in Changchun city were B and CRF01_AE,
which are different from those of a recent HIV-1 prevalence study in
Heilongjiang province in the north of Jilin \[10\] , but highly similar
to viruses from Liaoning province in the south \[11\] . Surprisingly,
multiple origins of some HIV-1 subtypes in Changchun were observed (
Figure 5 ): subtype B appeared to have originated in Henan and Liaoning,
while subtype CRF01_AE came from Liaoning, Guangxi and even foreign
countries such as Thailand. Multiple origins were also detected for
CRF07_BC viruses. In addition, multiple pathways of transmission, such
as through heterosexual activity, MSM, PBD and IDU, were found
responsible for HIV-1 circulating in Changchun city, further increasing
difficulties in prevention and control.

Figure 5

**Origins of HIV-1 circulating in Jilin Province. The pie chart shows
the distribution of HIV-1 subtypes circulating in Jilin province, which
are color-coded above the chart.**

The same colors are also used on the map to indicate possible origins of
HIV-1 in Jilin. Striped lines are used to indicate Liaoning and Guangxi
provinces, each of which contributed two different HIV-1 subtypes to
Jilin.

The geographical migration of HIV-1 in China was further demonstrated by
the finding of Yunnan, where subtype C viruses are now rarely isolated,
as the origin of the subtype C strain JL2048 from Jilin province. The
re-classification of the two strains of JL2005 and JL2006 during our
analysis from subtype C to CRF61_BC also suggested that circulating
recombinant forms are replacing subtype C viruses which were once
dominant in China.

HIV-1 subtype G strains are not commonly detected in China, as only 20
samples have been classified in China over the past 10 years (based on
searches of the GenBank database). However, this subtype can be more
easily detected in Africa, Europe and South America \[29\] -- \[31\] .
As indicated by both BLAST searches and phylogenetic analysis in the
current study, JL2012 apparently originated directly from Africa and not
within China even though subtype G strain was once detected in the
neighboring province of Liaoning. As patient JL2012 had not traveled
abroad, this subtype G strain potentially was imported through travelers
or labor import, suggesting that increased attention is needed for
monitoring international HIV-1 transmissions.

Viral DNA integrated into the human genome provides the template for
replication and thus is responsible for passing on mutations, including
those conferring antiviral drug resistance, to the next generation of
HIV-1 virions. Therefore, we screened all Gag/Pol sequences from this
study for antiviral drug resistance through the HIV Drug Resistance
Database at Stanford University. All samples were retrieved from
patients who had been treated with antivirals for one to three months.
NRTI- and NNRTI-resistant mutations were expected to be found, as
inhibitors targeting viral RT but not viral protease are widely used as
anti-HIV-1 drugs in China. Indeed, we observed seven such mutations in
six sequences which may be the result of selective pressure from
antiviral drugs. JL1009 was possibly resistant to NNTRIs such as
efavirenz (EFV), etravirine (ETR), nevirapine (NVP) and rilpivirine
(RPV). However, this finding is inconclusive since multiple possible
mutations were detected at position 101 on the reverse transcribed
sequence of JL1009. JL2048 was predicted to have resistance against ETR
and RPV. Notably, an intermediate level of resistance against zidovudine
(AZT), along with low-level resistance against stavudine (D4T), was
observed in the JL1013 sequence. Since this patient JL1013 was using
AZT, these findings indicated that an adjustment in his antiviral
therapy was required.

Although no PIs were used during prior treatment of the patients, six
samples were detected with mutations in protease, leading to PI
resistance of various degrees. Interestingly, five of these sequences
contained a mutation at position 71, and all of these five sequences
were located in the B1 cluster. Furthermore, A71T/V polymorphisms are
expected at the frequency of 2∼3% without selection, but the observed
ratio was 14.29% (5 out of 35), indicating the existence of additional
selective pressure. Another unusual phenomenon was that sequences such
as JL1009 contained multiple nucleotide mutations, which could result in
potential but still undetermined drug resistance. Nevertheless, all of
these observations revealed that the strains were under selection by
anti-viral drugs or other factors such as local cellular tropism. As the
existence of such mutations certainly presents difficulties in providing
effective antiviral treatment, further confirmation of the drug
resistance of these strains should be obtained in order to better
control the infection in patients or prevent transmission.



## Acknowledgments

We thank staff members at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in Changchun for sample collection. All retrieved HIV-1 sequences have
been submitted to GenBank and assigned with accession numbers
KJ544520--KJ544554.



## Funding Statement

This work was supported in part by funding from the Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology (2012CB911100 and No. 2013ZX0001-005) and Chinese
Ministry of Education (IRT1016), the Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology, Jilin Province (20102209), China, and a grant (2R56AI62644-6)
from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.



## Data Availability

The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully
available without restriction. All retrieved HIV-1 sequences have been
submitted to GenBank ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/ ) and
assigned with accession numbers of KJ544520-KJ544554.

