# HIV Drug Resistance Mutations in Proviral DNA from a Community Treatment Program

## Abstract

### Background

Drug resistance mutations archived in resting memory CD4+ cells may
persist despite suppression of HIV RNA to \<50 copies/ml. We sequenced
pol gene from proviral DNA among viremic and suppressed patients to
identify drug resistance mutations.

### Methods

The Peninsula AIDS Research Cohort study enrolled and followed over 2
years 120 HIV infected patients from San Mateo and San Francisco
Counties. HIV-1 pol genotyping by bulk sequencing was performed on 38
DNA and RNA from viremic patients and DNA only among 82 suppressed
patients at baseline. Antiretroviral susceptibility was predicted by
HIVDB.stanford.edu .

### Results

Among 120 subjects, 81% were on antiretroviral therapy and had been
treated for a median time of 7 years. Thirty-two viremic patients showed
concordant RNA and DNA genotypes (84%); the discordant profiles were
mainly observed in patients with low-level viremia. Among suppressed
patients, 21 had drug resistance mutations in proviral DNA (26%) with
potential resistance to one, two or three ARV classes in 16, 4 and 1
samples respectively.

### Conclusions

The high level of genotype concordance between DNA and RNA in viremic
patients suggested that DNA genotyping might be used to assess drug
resistance in resource-limited settings, and further investigation of
extracted DNA from dried blood spots is needed. Drug resistance
mutations in proviral DNA in 26% of subjects with less than 50 copies/ml
pose a risk for the transmission of drug resistant virus with virologic
failure, treatment interruption or decreased adherence.




## Material and Methods

### Study population

One hundred and twenty HIV infected individuals were recruited from the
Peninsula AIDS Research Consortium clinic at the San Mateo County AIDS
Program and the San Francisco Public Health Department clinic, and
enrolled in a longitudinal study of drug resistance. Participants were
recruited from public health clinics during attendance for routine HIV
care.

### Ethics statements

Written informed consent was obtained for each participant and the study
was approved by the institutional review board "Administrative Panels
for the Protection of Human Subjects" from Stanford University for the
protocol 7861 "Antiretroviral Drug Resistance in Blood, Oral, and
Genital HIV-1: Implications for Pathogenesis and Transmission of Drug
Resistance and Secondary Prevention in Community Based Treatment
Programs".

### Sample collection

Study visits occurred every 6 months over a total of 2 years. Blood
specimens were obtained at each visit and transported to the laboratory
within 6 hours of collection. Plasma was removed after centrifugation
and PBMC were separated from whole blood by density gradient
centrifugation and stored at -70°C in 90% human serum, 10% Dimethyl
Sulfoxyde (DMSO). Viral load (VL) and CD4 measures were performed by the
clinical laboratories at San Mateo County hospital using Roche Cobas
Amplicor Monitor v1.5 (Roche Molecular Diagnostics, Inc., Branchburg,
NJ, USA) and BD FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA),
respectively.

### DNA and RNA extractions

Virus was concentrated from 1 ml of plasma by centrifugation for 20 min
at 20,000g to pellet the virus, 800μl of supernatant was discarded and
RNA extracted from the 200μl residua with QIAamp viral RNA Mini kit
(QIAGEN Inc., Hilden, Germany) as per the manufacturer's protocol. vRNA
was used as template for reverse transcription using SuperScript II
Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and random hexamer
primers, using cycling parameters of 10min at 25°C, 30min at 45°C and
15min at 70°C, and the RNA template degraded with RNAse H for 20 min at
37°C. DNA was extracted from pelleted PBMC using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini
kit (QIAGEN Inc.).

### Genotyping

At baseline, vRNA and proviral DNA, were sequenced from viremic patients
(n = 38) while suppressed patients (n = 82) provided only a proviral DNA
genotype. Only the vRNA was sequenced from patients who virologically
failed during follow-up (n = 11).

A 1,300-bp fragment encompassing the protease (PR) and the first 300
amino acids of the reverse transcriptase (RT) gene was generated from
DNA and cDNA for PCR amplification, followed by a nested PCR with 1 ^st^
round PCR primers; MAW26 (5´-TTGGAAATGTGGAAAGGAAGGAC-3´) and RT21
(5´-CTGTATTTCTGCTAT TAAGTCTTTTGATGGG-3´) and 2 ^nd^ round with PRO1
(5´-CAGAGCCAACAGCCC CACCA-3´) and RT20 (5´-CTGCCAGTTCTAGCTCTG CTTC-3´),
with Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen), 50pmoles of each primer,
2mM of Magnesium Chloride and 0.5mM of dNTPs. Forty cycles for the 1
^st^ and 35 for the 2 ^nd^ round of 94°C for 15s, 55°C for 20s and 72°C
for 2 min, then 10min at 72°C produced a nested PCR product, purified
using QIAquick PCR Purification kit (QIAGEN Inc.), as per manufacturer's
protocol. After quantification, 30ng were sequenced using the Big Dye
Terminator kit (Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, USA) and a set of 4
bidirectional primers by capillary electrophoresis on a 3130xl Genetic
Analyzer (Life Technologies).

### Sequence analysis

Sequences were assembled using Geneious R6 genetic analyzer (Biomatters,
Auckland, NZ) \[ 35 \]. DRM were identified using the Stanford HIV Drug
Resistance Database \[ 36 \]. A Neighbor Joining phylogenetic tree was
inferred with Phylip package \[ 37 \] with 2-Kimura parameters and
support values for the branching pattern were calculated from 1000
bootstrap replicates, visualized using FigTree \[ 38 \] and analyzed for
potential transmission clusters and linked infections. The frequency of
apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing, enzyme-catalytic, polypeptide-like 3G/F
(APOBEC3G/F) G to A mutations have been determined with the Calibrated
Population Resistance tool from the HIV Stanford Database for Quality
Assessment \[ 39 \]. More than 3 characteristic mutations in the RT and
2 in the PR genes associated with APOBEC3G/F activity were considered as
evidence for hypermutation. HIV-1 PR and RT sequences recovered from
PBMC and viral RNA have been submitted to GenBank with the accession
numbers KJ69464 to KJ769641.


## Results

### Baseline characteristics

One hundred and twenty subjects were enrolled: their demographic,
immunologic and virologic baseline characteristics are presented in
Table 1 . The median age of the study population was 44 years (ranging
from 20 to 64), 82% were male, 38% White, 28% African-American, 25%
Hispanic/Latino and 9% Asian/Pacific Island/Native American (reflecting
the ethnic and gender distributions of HIV infection in the San
Francisco Bay Area). Among all study participants, 97 (81%) had been on
ART for a median of 7 years. Of these patients, 41% remained on a
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitor (NNRTI) and 59% on a
Protease inhibitor (PI) based regimen.


At study entry 82 subjects (68%) were suppressed to \<50 copies/ml and
38 (32%) had \>50 copies/ml of plasma HIV-1 RNA with a median of 5,865
copies/ml. The median CD4+ cells count was 422/mm ^3^ among suppressed
patients and 305/mm ^3^ among viremic patients. Cumulative ART history
included exposure to TDF (85%), AZT and/or d4T (57%) and 57% and 66% had
received an NNRTI- or PI- based regimen respectively.

### Baseline resistance profiles in viremic patients

Overall, resistance profiles in both vRNA and proviral DNA were
concordant in 32/38 viremic patients at baseline (84%). Twenty-four
patients had wild-type genotype in both vRNA and DNA and 14 had DRM (see
Table 2 ); 12 had resistance mutations in vRNA and DNA with identical
DRM in 8/12 (some present in vRNA were absent in proviral DNA), and 2
had DRM only in DNA (see Fig. 1 and Table 2 ).

Among viremic patients, 18/38 (47%) had been on treatment at baseline
for a median of 4 years (ranging from 1 to 13 years). Half were
wild-type and the other half harbored resistance in vRNA and proviral
DNA, and 4 of them displayed DRM in vRNA that were not present in
proviral DNA (see Table 2 -- upper section).

Twenty viremic patients were not treated or had interrupted treatment
prior to enrollment, 15 of whom had wild-type genotype in both vRNA and
proviral DNA. Three of the twenty untreated patients had DRM in both
vRNA and DNA, and 2 had DRM only in proviral DNA (see Table 2 -- lower
section).

Discordant resistance profiles in vRNA and DNA were seen in 6 patients
with low viral load (mean of 697 copies/ml) in contrast with the
concordant genotypes among 32 with higher virus load (mean 31,252
copies/ml). Considering only viremic patients with VL \>1,000 copies/ml,
concordance between vRNA and proviral DNA was 97%. Finally, among 12
patients known to have been previously exposed to NNRTI, 4 had NNRTI
resistance mutations in proviral DNA while among 22 exposed to PI, only
3 had PI resistance mutations.

### Baseline resistance profiles in suppressed patients

Most of the 82 suppressed subjects were on treatment, 3 were reported to
be off of treatment and harbored wild-type genotypes in proviral DNA
(see Fig. 1 ). Twenty-one harbored archived DRM in proviral DNA (26%);
11 to NRTI, 5 to NNRTI only, 3 to NNRTI and NRTI, 1 to PI and NRTI, and
1 had DRM to all the 3 classes. Three of the subjects had NNRTI
resistance mutations in proviral DNA although previous NNRTI exposure
had not been recorded. Among the 12 subjects exposed to NNRTI, 6 (50%)
had NNRTI resistance mutations, while among 17 patients who have been
exposed to a PI only 2 (12%) harbored PI resistance mutations. Among the
61 without detectable DRM in proviral DNA, 5 (8%) had ≥3 APOBEC3G/F
signature mutations in *pol* gene with modestly higher CD4 cell counts
(mean value 435 vs 578 CD4 cells/mm ^3^ ).

### Emergence of viremia and virologic failure

Of the 82 study subjects with \<50 copies/ml at study entry, 11/82 (13%)
subsequently had a VL \>50 copies/ml at a mean of 39 weeks. Seven of the
11 had virologic failure with \>1,000 copies/ml (mean VL = 28,331
copies/ml), among them 3 had DRM in proviral DNA at baseline (upper
section of Table 3 ); 1 had an NRTI mutation (PID 10069), 1 had NNRTI
mutations (PID 10082) and 1 had both NRTI and NNRTI mutations (PID
10033). Two of them had the same DRM at virological failure and one had
wild-type genotype. Two patients among 4 with wild-type genotype at
baseline developed new DRM consistent with NNRTI based regimen (PIDs
10017 and 50002, middle section of Table 3 ). Among the 4 with low level
VF (mean VL = 160 copies/ml) (lower section of Table 3 ); one patient
had NRTI mutations at baseline and virologic failure (PID 10059), and
another one wild-type at baseline had a K70KR mixture arose at VF (PID
10018). The 2 other patients (PIDs 10010 and 20014) had a wild-type
genotype at both baseline and virological failure.

### Phylogenetic analysis

A phylogenetic tree shown as Fig. 2 shows 2 pairs of sequences that
cluster with high bootstrap values. The first pair includes 2 men in
their late 30s, one heterosexual and one a former intravenous drug user
(IDU). The second pair of men in their late 30s, included a former IDU
who had sex with men and a heterosexual. These risk group
characteristics suggest that direct transmission was unlikely to occur,
but the clustering suggests a common source of infection.


Ethnicities are represent with different color codes: blue = White,
green = Hispanic, red = African American and black = Asian and others.
Bootstrap values for transmission clusters are showed. Drug resistance
mutations are also represented ● NRTI ■ NNRTI and ▲ PI.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117430.g002

Another cluster distinguished from the tree includes 18 subjects. Their
median age is 50 years, and 16 are African-American, 15 are former IDU,
10 are female and 10 currently live in East Palo Alto. Despite a low
bootstrap value (430), this group shares common characteristics, which
highlight the dynamic of HIV epidemic among drug users and their sexual
partners in the 1990s \[ 40 \].


## Discussion

In summary, our study showed that proviral DNA and vRNA drug resistance
profiles of viremic subjects are concordant (84%, CI95%: 69--92%) and
are consistent with a median of 87% describe in the literature \[ 4 , 13
, 41 -- 45 \]. Discordance was most common among those with low virus
loads (50--1,000 copies/ml). Among those with \>1,000 copies/ml, there
was 97% concordance between mutations detected in viral RNA and PBMC
DNA.

RNA genotyping is the gold-standard template for HIV drug resistance
testing and requires RNA extraction, reverse-transcription followed by
PCR and sequencing reactions. vRNA is labile and genotyping protocols
mandate separation and storage of plasma at -70°C within 6 hours. In
addition, reverse transcription is the most critical and costly step in
RNA genotyping \[ 46 \]. While this study used cryopreserved PBMC, which
can be labor intensive to prepare and requires cold storage as well, DNA
may be extracted from whole blood or dried blood spots, and can be
transported at room temperature for several days. These results suggest
that proviral DNA sequencing may be a less resource intensive means to
assess drug resistance in resource-limited settings among patients
failing ART. Further studies should compare genotyping of vRNA and
proviral DNA extracted from dried blood spots to approximate to
"real-life" conditions in RLS. Cheaper, easier and reliable proviral DNA
genotyping may offer communities and clinics, distant from laboratory
facilities, improved clinical management of HIV patients in
decentralized treatment programs.

DRM, predominantly NRTI and NNRTI resistance mutations, were found in
PBMC proviral DNA among 26% of subjects with suppressed plasma RNA
levels who enrolled in a community treatment program in California.
Those with PBMC DRM had failed previous ART and were subsequently
suppressed on either a boosted PI or NNRTI based regimen. Stable
reservoirs of NRTI and NNRTI DRM (particularly M184V and K103N) in PBMC
are common at virologic failure of a first-line NNRTI based regimen \[
23 , 34 , 47 -- 51 \]. Archived DRM in proviral DNA despite suppression
of plasma RNA for years, raises concern about the potential for
transmitted drug resistance (TDR). Among the viremic subjects in this
study who denied previous NNRTI exposure, 2/16 (12.5%) had DRM in vRNA
and proviral DNA, which is consistent with levels of TDR associated with
acute infection and newly diagnosed patients in San Francisco \[ 52 \].
The NNRTI and NRTI mutations observed included K103N, G190A and K238T
and K65R, T215Y/F and M184V associated with rapid virologic failure on
NNRTI first-line regimens as well as transmission \[ 53 -- 56 \]. The
DRM observed in proviral DNA of suppressed subjects, may be expressed in
vRNA in the genital track, and thus potentially may be transmitted by
genital fluids \[ 57 \].

The significance of low level viremia (between 50 and 1,000 copies/ml)
remains controversial \[ 58 -- 61 \]. These values require confirmation,
and few authorities would recommend drug switching with VL measures
based on a single value between 50 and 1,000 copies/ml \[ 62 , 63 \].
Among samples with \<1,000 copies/ml, genotyping of PBMC and plasma
demonstrated DRM in 5 of 9 from both components, and those with DRM in
the plasma had similar DRM in PBMC DNA. Some discordance in specific
mutations (present in one compartment or the other) was observed, but
differences between plasma and PBMC did not identify new class
resistance nor were they sufficient to alter treatment considerations.
The sensitivity of detection of individual DRM in PBMC as compared to
plasma was 84% (32/38). There were 2 instances at low virus load (156
and 2770 copies/ml) where DRM found in PBMC (M184V, V82F) were not
expressed in plasma. This may be due to the re-emergence of wild-type
virus with waning drug pressure and early virologic failure. Also, 4
samples displayed DRM in vRNA that were absent from proviral DNA that
may be explained by the emergence of DRM not yet archived in proviral
DNA or present but at levels undetectable by bulk sequencing \<20%.
Further studies may be required to examine minor viral quasispecies in
proviral DNA with Next Generation Sequencing technologies.

In assigning clinical significance to DRM in PBMC, the study is limited
by the potency of modern suppressive regimens with relatively small
numbers with virologic failure over a mean follow-up of 46 weeks.
However the frequency of DRM at entry among suppressed individuals who
developed virologic failure 4/11 (36%) was similar to DRM found among
those who remained suppressed, 17/68 (25%), suggesting that DRM in PBMC
are not themselves a risk for virologic failure, and were only expressed
in a fraction of those with later virologic failure.

APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases restrict endogenous and exogenous
retroviruses by inducing G to A hypermutations in GG or GA dinucleotides
context. HIV-1 counteracts this antiviral activity through Vif. Kieffer
et al showed that hypermutated sequences comprise \>9% of archived
species in resting CD4+ cells \[ 64 \]. In our study 5/81 proviral
sequences were hypermutated (6%), consistent with recent studies \[ 65 ,
66 \], where E138K and M184I were the most common APOBEC3G/F associated
mutations. These were clearly defined as codons that were hypermutated
rather than mutations selected by 2 ^nd^ generation NNRTI and 3TC/FTC
respectively and can be attributed to APOBEC3G/F editing \[ 67 , 68 \].

Fourati et al demonstrated that the HIV-1 genome is often defective in
PBMC after a long-term HAART \[ 69 \]. In our study, subjects with
APOBEC3G/F signature mutations had higher median CD4 counts than those
without (578 vs 435 cells/mm ^3^ ) reflecting a robust immune response.
However, archival DRM, even in hypermutated sequences, can shape the
phenotype of the circulating viral population through recombination with
replication competent virus, leading to resistant strains \[ 67 \].
Defective HIV-1 quasispecies in the form of multiple drug-resistant
proviral DNA within cells can be rescued by superinfection with
different subtype variants of HIV-1, HIV-2 and SIV \[ 70 \].

Sequencing proviral DNA provided additional information about DRM, which
may impact treatment decisions, particularly in the setting of low level
viremia or suppression. Moreover, new information about phylogenetic
relationships and the prevalence of DRM, albeit as archival mutations
among suppressed individuals may identify historic transmission dynamics
in a community. Here we found linkage among African American men and
women in East Palo Alto, consistent with a reported peak in the IDU
epidemic more than 20 years ago in this community \[ 71 \]. Although the
ultimate duration and clinical significance of proviral resistance is
not fully defined, archival mutations often are expressed upon virologic
failure, potentially contributing to TDR, and archived mutations may
limit future treatment options. Further studies of proviral DNA
sequences and sequence analysis in monitoring ART are warranted.

