

## Request Username

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

Email\*

Close


## Create a new account

Email

Returning user


## Change Password

Old Password

New Password

close

-    Login
-    Register

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-

Email\*

Password\*

Forgot password? Reset it here

Keep me logged in

Fields with \* are mandatory

Don\'t have an account? Create one here

-

Can\'t sign in? Forgot your password?

Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset
instructions

Email\*

Cancel

CLOSE

This Journal

Enter words / phrases / DOI / ISBN / keywords / authors / etc

Search Search

Advanced search

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

Suggested Terms:

-   open access policy
-   peer review at ASM
-   what it costs to publish with ASM
-   calls for editors
-   asm journals collections

0

Login

Skip main navigation

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

-
-    JOURNAL HOME
-    FOR AUTHORS
-    ARTICLES
-    ABOUT THE JOURNAL
-    FOR SUBSCRIBERS

JOURNALS

0

Login

::: {role="main"}

1.   ASM Journals
2.   Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
3.   Vol. 59, No. 1
4.   Antiviral Characteristics of GSK1265744, an HIV Integrase Inhibitor
Dosed Orally or by Long-Acting Injection

Advertisement

Research Article

23 December 2014

Share on

-
-
-
-


# Antiviral Characteristics of GSK1265744, an HIV Integrase Inhibitor Dosed Orally or by Long-Acting Injection

Authors : Tomokazu Yoshinaga , Masanori Kobayashi , Takahiro Seki ,
Shigeru Miki , Chiaki Wakasa-Morimoto , Akemi Suyama-Kagitani , Shinobu
Kawauchi-Miki , Show All (14 Authors) , , , , , , , Tamio Fujiwara
Authors Info & Affiliations

DOI : https://doi.org/10.1128/aac.03909-14

80
4,195

### Metrics

###  Total Citations   80

###  Total Downloads   4,195

Cite

PDF/EPUB

-    Contents

AAC

Volume 59 , Number 1 \
January 2015

-   ABSTRACT
-   INTRODUCTION
-   MATERIALS AND METHODS
-   RESULTS
-   DISCUSSION
-   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
-   REFERENCES

-
-    Information & Contributors
-    Metrics & Citations
-    References
-    Figures and Media
-    Tables
-    Share

::: section

## ABSTRACT

GSK1265744 is a new HIV integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI)
engineered to deliver efficient antiviral activity with a once-daily,
low-milligram dose that does not require a pharmacokinetic booster. The
*in vitro* antiviral profile and mechanism of action of GSK1265744 were
established through integrase enzyme assays, resistance passage
experiments, and cellular assays with site-directed molecular (SDM) HIV
clones resistant to other classes of anti-HIV-1 agents and earlier
INSTIs. GSK1265744 inhibited HIV replication with low or subnanomolar
efficacy and with a selectivity index of at least 22,000 under the same
culture conditions. The protein-adjusted half-maximal inhibitory
concentration (PA-EC ~50~ ) extrapolated to 100% human serum was 102 nM.
When the virus was passaged in the presence of GSK1265744, highly
resistant mutants with more than a 10-fold change (FC) in EC ~50~
relative to that of the wild-type were not observed for up to 112 days
of culture. GSK1265744 demonstrated activity against SDM clones
containing the raltegravir (RAL)-resistant Y143R, Q148K, N155H, and
G140S/Q148H signature variants (FC less than 6.1), while these mutants
had a high FC in the EC ~50~ for RAL (11 to \>130). Either additive or
synergistic effects were observed when GSK1265744 was tested in
combination with representative anti-HIV agents, and no antagonistic
effects were seen. These findings demonstrate that, similar to
dolutegravir, GSK1265744 is differentiated as a new INSTI, having a
markedly distinct resistance profile compared with earlier INSTIs, RAL,
and elvitegravir (EVG). The collective data set supports further
clinical development of GSK1265744.

::: section

## INTRODUCTION

The morbidity and mortality of HIV infection and AIDS have dramatically
decreased since the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART), now commonly referred to as combination antiretroviral therapy
(cART). Thus, HIV infection has become a manageable chronic infectious
disease. This significant clinical advancement has resulted from
progress in the discovery and development of anti-HIV drugs that exploit
novel mechanisms of action, improve efficacy and durability with less
inherent toxicity, and are amenable to more convenient dosing regimens
for patients. However, there still exist unmet medical needs, including
those for patients who have experienced treatment failure, for
prevention of transmission via a preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP)
approach, and for patients with difficulties in maintaining adherence.
The reasons for virologic failure can be complex but are often due to
intrinsic characteristics of a drug, which may include the emergence of
drug-resistant mutants and can in turn be exacerbated by low drug levels
due to pharmacokinetic or adherence issues.

The first integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI), raltegravir (RAL)
(MK-0518) ( 1 , 2 ), was approved by the U.S. FDA in 2007. The second
INSTI, elvitegravir (EVG) (GS-9130, formerly JTK-303), was approved in
2012 as a component of "Stribild," which is a fixed-dose combination of
EVG, cobicistat, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and emtricitabine ( 3 ,
4 , 5 ). INSTIs are now recognized as a safe and highly effective class
of anti-HIV drugs ( 6 ). However, clinical resistance to RAL and EVG has
been observed, and a high degree of cross-resistance between these two
agents has been demonstrated ( 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ). Furthermore,
dosing of RAL is done twice daily, while once-daily administration of
EVG requires a pharmacokinetic (PK) booster, such as ritonavir or
cobicistat. Because these two agents are inhibiters of drug metabolism,
their use raises concerns about the levels of concomitantly used drugs.
Ritonavir also raises long-term safety concerns ( 13 ). Therefore, new
INSTIs should have attributes that address these unmet needs.

The Shionogi and GlaxoSmithKline research collaboration initiated in
2002 has made considerable progress in engineering INSTIs with a
distinct resistance profile and low-dose once-daily unboosted regimens.
Dolutegravir (DTG) (S/GSK1349572, brand name TIVICAY) was approved by
the U.S. FDA in 2013, and GSK1265744 (formerly S/GSK1265744), with the
generic name cabotegravir (USAN approved), is in phase 2 clinical
trials. They contain a two-metal binding pharmacophore consisting of a
carbamoyl pyridone moiety (see Fig. 1 ) and were optimized to deliver
the attributes that would differentiate them as new INSTIs ( 14 , 15 ).
Clinical data for GSK1265744 administered to healthy subjects and HIV
patients present a PK profile supporting once-daily oral administration
from a low-milligram dose, with low PK variability and excellent
short-term safety/tolerability, as well as highly effective anti-HIV
activity from 10 days of monotherapy ( 16 ).

The focus of the development of GSK1265744 was a long-acting (LA)
injectable formulation due to its favorable attributes: low solubility
(0.015 mg/ml in pH 6.8 phosphate buffer at 20°C) and low plasma
clearance (0.32 ml/min/kg of body weight in monkeys) for HIV treatment
and prevention. The data from a phase 1 single-dose GSK1265744 LA study
in healthy volunteers supported once-monthly to once-quarterly dosing (
17 , 18 ). Recently, a repeat-dose coadministration study of GSK1265744
LA and TMC278 LA in healthy subject results was described ( 19 ). LA
development is attractive for both treatment and use as a preventative
measure in a preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) setting. Although Truvada
(emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate) was approved by FDA
for PrEP, a PrEP clinical study data of Truvada suggested that daily
compliance was a complicating factor for healthy high-risk individuals,
ultimately leading to reduced efficacy of the approach ( 20 ).

We report herein the *in vitro* antiretroviral properties of GSK1265744,
including its mechanism of action and *in vitro* resistance
characteristics essential for clinical development.

::: section

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Compounds.

GSK1265744, RAL, and EVG were synthesized at GlaxoSmithKline, Research
Triangle Park, NC. Efavirenz (EFV) and lamivudine were purchased from
Sequoia Research Products, Ltd, Pangbourne, United Kingdom. See Fig. 1
for the structures of GSK1265744, DTG, RAL, and EVG.

### Cells and viruses.

MT-4 cells, a human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-transformed
human T-cell line, were maintained as described previously ( 21 ). 293T
cells were maintained in Dulbecco\'s modified Eagle medium (DMEM)-F12
medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were derived from whole-blood samples obtained
from HIV-negative donors. PBMCs were separated from whole blood by
density gradient centrifugation with Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE HealthCare,
Waukesha, WI) according to the manufacturer\'s instructions and were
stimulated by addition of either 20 U/ml of interleukin-2 (IL-2) or 10%
natural T-cell growth factor (ZeptoMetrix, Buffalo, NY) plus 5 to 10
μg/ml of phytohemagglutinin (PHA). Molt-4 cells persistently infected
with HIV-1 strain IIIB and MT-2 cells ( 22 ) were obtained from S.
Harada (Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan). HeLa-CD4 cells containing
an HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)-driven β-galactosidase reporter gene
was described previously ( 23 ). HIV-1 strain IIIB was derived from
cell-free supernatants of cultures of the chronically infected cell line
H93B (H9/HTLV-IIIB). HIV-1 strain Ba-L was purchased from Advanced
Biotechnologies Inc. (Columbia, MD) and was expanded in PHA-activated
PBMCs, while HIV-1 NL432 ( 24 ) was obtained from A. Adachi (Tokushima
University, Tokushima, Japan). Plasmid pGJ3-Luci, containing a
replication-defective HIV lentivirus vector expressing luciferase ( 25
), was licensed from Christian Jassoy (University of Leipzig) and used
to create stocks of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein
(VSV-G)-pseudotyped self-inactivating pseudo-HIV (PHIV) lentiviral
vector by cotransfecting along with plasmid pVSV-G (Clontech) into CIP4
cells (a derivative of the 293T human renal epithelial cell line that
expresses macrophage scavenger receptor SRA-I to improve adherence to
plastic) and harvesting the cell-free supernatant.

### *In vitro* strand transfer assay.

The inhibitory concentrations of GSK1265744 and other INSTIs were
measured in a strand transfer assay using recombinant HIV IN as
previously described ( 26 ). A complex of integrase and biotinylated
donor DNA-streptavidin-coated scintillation proximity assay (SPA) beads
was formed by incubating 2 μM purified recombinant integrase with 0.66
μM biotinylated donor DNA--4 mg/ml streptavidin-coated SPA beads in 25
mM sodium morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS) (pH 7.2), 23 mM NaCl,
and 10 mM MgCl ~2~ for 5 min at 37°C. These beads were spun down and
preincubated with diluted INSTIs for 60 min at 37°C. Next, ^3^ H-labeled
target DNA substrate was added to give a final concentration of 7 nM
substrate, and the strand transfer reaction mixture was incubated at
37°C for 25 to 45 min, which allowed for a linear increase in strand
transfer of donor DNA to radiolabeled target DNA. The signal was read
using a Wallac MicroBeta scintillation plate reader.

### Antiviral assay in MT-4 cells.

MT-4 cells growing exponentially at a density of (5 or 6) × 10 ^5^
cells/ml were infected with HIV-1 strain IIIB at a viral multiplicity of
infection of 0.001 or a 50% tissue culture infectious dose of 4 to 10.
The cells were then aliquoted to 96-well plates in the presence of
various concentrations of compounds. After incubation for 4 or 5 days,
the antiviral activity was measured in a cell viability assay that
either measured bioluminescence with a CellTiter-Glo luminescent reagent
(Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) or absorbance at 560 and 690 nm using
the yellow tetrazolium MTT reagent \[(3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide)\].

### PHIV assay.

The antiviral activities of compounds were measured in a single-round
assay using a self-inactivating PHIV lentiviral vector. CIP4 cells (2 ×
10 ^4^ cells/well) were infected with PHIV sufficient to produce
approximately 50,000 relative light units in the assay. The infected
cells were added to 96-well, black, clear-bottom plates with various
concentrations of GSK1265744 and incubated for 2 days. Luciferase
activity was measured in a luminometer using the Steady-Glo reagent
(Promega Corporation).

### Antiviral assay in PBMCs.

In one 96-well culture plate, PHA- and IL-2-stimulated PBMCs (4 × 10 ^5^
cells/well) were preincubated with a test compound for 1 h while HIV-1
strain Ba-L was mixed with the same compound in a second plate. An
aliquot of the Ba-L--compound mixture was then transferred to the
PBMC-compound mixture and incubated for 7 days. In a separate
experiment, PHA--IL-2--stimulated PBMCs (1 × 10 ^6^ cells/well) were
preincubated with HIV-1 strain NL432 for 2 h at room temperature. After
incubation, the cells were resuspended and transferred to a 96-well
culture plate containing a test compound and thoroughly mixed, and the
mixture was incubated for 4 days. In both experiments, after incubation
for 4 or 7 days, supernatants were assayed for reverse transcriptase
(RT) activity by incorporating \[methyl- ^3^
H\]deoxythymidine-5′-triphosphate to measure viral replication as
previously described ( 27 ).

### Effect of human serum and serum proteins.

The effect of the presence of human serum albumin (HSA) (20 or 40
mg/ml), α ~1~ -acid glycoprotein (AAG) (2 mg/ml), and human serum (HS)
(using up to 30% or 50% and extrapolated to 100%) on the antiviral
activity of GSK1265744 was evaluated in PHIV and MT-4 assay systems. To
estimate the effects of protein binding, antiviral activity was tested
with the addition of various concentrations of human serum to an HIV
replication assay in MT-4 cells as previously described ( 27 ). The
protein-adjusted half-maximal effective concentration (PA-EC ~50~ ) was
estimated by multiplying the EC ~50~ in PBMCs by the fold-shift value.

### Cytotoxicity assays.

*In vitro* growth inhibition (cytotoxicity) studies were conducted with
GSK1265744 in proliferating human leukemia and lymphoma cell lines
(IM-9, U-937, MT-4, and Molt-4) as well as stimulated and unstimulated
human PBMCs. As a surrogate of cell growth, ATP levels were quantified
using the CellTiter-Glo luciferase reagent.

### Mechanistic cellular studies.

To determine if GSK1265744 was inhibiting HIV replication in cellular
assays through an integrase inhibition mechanism, the effect on the
synthesis of HIV NL432 DNA species in MT-4 cells was measured in a
single-round infection assay using quantitative PCR methods in the
presence of INSTI or nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
(NNRTI) as described previously with minor modifications ( 27 ).
Briefly, 293T cells were transfected with the NL432 plasmid to generate
infectious virus, and the supernatant was filtered through
0.45-μm-pore-size filters and treated with DNase I. MT-4 cells were
infected with HIV-1 NL432 virus for 1 h with diluted compound and
collected after 6 or 18 h of incubation. All cells were incubated with a
0.5 μM concentration of the protease inhibitor (PI) ritonavir to limit
HIV replication to a single cycle. Total-DNA PCR to detect late RT
products was performed with the samples after 6 h of incubation. Nested
Alu-PCR to detect integrated provirus and two-LTR PCR to detect two-LTR
circles were performed with the samples taken at 18 h of incubation.
Reactions were analyzed using the ABI Prism 7900HT-3 sequence detection
system (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA).

### Isolation of drug-resistant viruses.

Isolation of drug-resistant viruses was performed according to the
previously described protocol ( 28 ). Briefly, the virus for initiating
passage work was prepared by coculturing MT-2 cells with Molt-4 cells
persistently infected with HIV-1 strain IIIB for 3 days. Fresh MT-2
cells were dispensed into each well of a 24-well tissue culture plate.
Three wells of each culture containing several concentrations of a
compound were used initially, and the virus, prepared as described
above, was added to each well. Every 3 or 4 days, the cells were
passaged with or without addition of fresh MT-2 cells. When a cytopathic
effect was observed, the supernatants were used to infect fresh MT-2
cells, and the concentration of the compound was held constant or
increased 5-fold. Every 2 weeks, when replication of viruses was
ascertained by observing the cytopathic effect, the infected cells were
collected and used for genotypic and phenotypic analyses. To analyze
mutations, DNA was extracted from the infected cells using the DNeasy
blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and the integrase region
of HIV proviral DNA was amplified by PCR with specific primers (M-poli7,
AACAAGTAGATAAATTAGTCAGT; M-poli8, TAGTGGGATGTGTACTTCTGAAC). Sequencing
of the products was provided by the Operon Biotechnologies sequencing
service. The sequence of the integrase region derived from isolated
viruses was compared with that of wild-type IIIB, and amino acid
substitutions were identified.

### Construction of IN region-recombinant HIV-1 molecular clones.

We constructed IN region-recombinant HIV-1 molecular clones as described
previously ( 14 ). Briefly, the XbaI-EcoRI fragment from pNL-IN301
(pNL432 \[ 24 \] inserted the XbaI site into the 5′ end of the integrase
region) was cloned into the XbaI-EcoRI site of cloning vector pUC18. To
introduce integrase-resistant mutations, *in vitro* mutagenesis of the
integrase gene was performed with the QuikChange site-directed
mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, a division of Agilent Technologies, Santa
Clara, CA) using a pUC18 clone containing the integrase region as a
template. The mutated XbaI-EcoRI fragment was amplified and ligated into
pNL-IN301 to construct a recombinant HIV-1 molecular clone. Plasmids
were subsequently transfected into 293T cells to generate infectious
virus. Supernatants were harvested after 2 days of culture and stored as
cell-free culture supernatants at −80°C.

### Cross-resistance profiling of GSK1265744.

GSK1265744 was evaluated against molecular clones with mutations in the
IN-, RT-, and protease (PR)-coding regions. INSTI-, nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI)-, and NNRTI-resistant mutants were
analyzed by the reporter assay based on HeLa-CD4 cells, while
PI-resistant mutants were analyzed by infectivity in MT-4 cells,
monitoring RT activity as described previously ( 27 ). The HIV-1
wild-type infectious molecular clone pNL432 was used for site-directed
mutagenesis to generate HIV clones containing mutations. Fifty
INSTI-resistant mutants were constructed. The molecular clones with
K101E, K103N, E138K, Y181C, M184I, M184V, Y188L, K101E/M184I,
E138K/M184I D67/K70R/T215Y, and R4 (V75I/F77L/F116Y/Q151M) substitutions
within the RT coding region were used as NRTI or NNRTI-resistant
viruses, and PI-resistant mutants carrying the M46I/I47V/I50V and
L24I/M46I/L63P/A71V/G73S/V82T mutations with the protease coding region
were used. 293T cells were subsequently transfected with the plasmids to
generate infectious virus using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen
Corporation, Carlsbad, CA). Supernatants were harvested 2 to 3 days
after transfection, stored as cell-free culture supernatants at −80°C,
and used for each assay.

### Combination antiviral activity assay in MT-4 cells.

The *in vitro* combination activity relationships of GSK1265744 were
determined as previously described ( 29 ). Multiple concentrations of
GSK1265744 were tested in a checkerboard dilution fashion in the
presence and absence of dilutions of approved representative anti-HIV
drugs, adefovir or ribavirin. The interaction of compounds was analyzed
by dosewise additivity-based calculations. Wells containing the top
concentration of compounds by themselves were compared to wells with the
top concentration of both compounds to show that combination effects
were due to the drugs used and not to toxicity. Assays with the MT-4
system format were run as described previously ( 27 ). Fractional
inhibitory concentration (FIC) values in the range of −0.1 to −0.2
indicated weak synergy, values that approached −0.5 indicated strong
synergy, and positive values of 0.1 to 0.2 indicated weak antagonism.
The effects of the anti-hepatitis B virus (HBV) and anti-hepatitis C
virus (HCV) agents adefovir and ribavirin on the GSK1265744 EC ~50~ were
examined using linear regression as described previously ( 30 ). Since
the HIV-1 IIIB MT-4 system is CXCR4 based, the CCR5 inhibitor Maraviroc
was evaluated in a checkerboard dilution format using HIV-1
Ba-L-infected MAGI-CCR5 cells with Gal-Screen reagent (Tropix, Bedford,
MA) for the chemiluminescent endpoint. Data were analyzed as described
by Prichard ( 31 ) using the MacSynergy II program. Synergy volumes in
the range of −50 to 50 defined additivity, \<−50 defined antagonism, and
\>50 defined synergy.

::: section

## RESULTS

### Inhibition of recombinant HIV integrase and HIV replication by GSK1265744.

As with other INSTIs, GSK1265744 has a two-metal binding scaffold and is
in the same structural class as DTG ( Fig. 1 ). However, the differences
in the structure of GSK1265744 give it properties distinct from those of
DTG, including high protein binding. The biochemical strand transfer
inhibitory activity and anti-HIV activity of GSK1265744 in the absence
of human serum were similar to those of DTG ( Table 1 ).

FIG 1

TABLE 1

^a^

Data for dolutegravir, raltegravir, and elvitegravir are from reference
14 .

^b^

Protein-binding fold shift (FC, fold change) was estimated from
antiviral activity with various concentrations of human serum and
extrapolated to a 100% human serum condition.

^c^

Mean from 11 experiments with HIV-1 strain Ba-L and 5 experiments with
HIV-1 NL432.

GSK1265744 inhibited the HIV-1 integrase catalyzed strand transfer
reaction with an IC ~50~ of 3.0 nM *in vitro* . The antiviral EC ~50~
against HIV-1 Ba-L was 0.22 nM, and that against NL432 was 0.34 nM in
PBMCs, 0.57 nM using CellTiter-Glo and 1.3 nM using MTT in MT-4 cells,
and 0.5 nM in the PHIV assay, which uses a pseudotyped self-inactivating
virus. Calculations of the EC ~50~ to 90% effective concentration (EC
~90~ ) fold shift showed a range from 3-fold to a maximum of 4-fold.
Therefore, the EC ~90~ was conservatively estimated by multiplying the
EC ~50~ by 4. The low-nanomolar GSK1265744 efficacy was similar to the
efficacies of DTG, RAL, and EVG ( Table 1 ). In the MT-4 antiviral
assay, the estimated potency shift due to plasma protein binding was
408-fold when extrapolated to 100% human serum and 84-fold in the
presence of 20 mg/ml HSA. In the PHIV assay, the potency shift was
63-fold with 40 mg/ml HSA and 1.6-fold in the presence of 2 mg/ml AAG.
The extrapolated potency shift of 408-fold for GSK1265744 in the
presence of 100% human serum was also applied to the EC ~50~ and EC ~90~
in PBMC, resulting in PA-EC ~50~ and PA-EC ~90~ values of 102 nM and 408
nM, respectively. The potency shift of GSK1265744 was higher than those
of the other three approved INSTIs, with consequently higher PA-EC ~50~
and PA-EC ~90~ values ( Table 1 ).

The 50% cytotoxic concentrations (CC ~50~ ) for GSK1265744 in
proliferating IM-9, U-937, MT-4, and Molt-4 cell lines were 6.4, 5.0,
9.2, and 13 μM, respectively. In unstimulated and stimulated peripheral
blood lymphocytes (PBLs) (both from the same four donors), the CC ~50~
were 120 μM and 42 μM, respectively. Based on the EC ~50~ of GSK1265744
versus HIV-1 in PBLs (0.22 nM), the cell-based therapeutic index was at
least 22,000.

### Cellular mechanistic studies.

As expected for an INSTI and as shown in Fig. 2 , GSK1265744 inhibited
integration of viral DNA ( Fig. 2a ) with a concomitant increase in
2-LTR circles ( Fig. 2b ) and no effect on viral DNA production ( Fig.
2c ). Furthermore, the concentration dependency of the effects was
within the margin of error for the potency observed in the inhibition of
viral replication in PBMCs and MT-4 cells. These effects were similar to
those observed with RAL and DTG in our previous study ( 14 , 27 ) and
were in contrast to the effects of the NNRTI EFV.

FIG 2

### Cross-resistance profiling of GSK1265744.

When tested against HIV strains resistant to marketed NNRTIs or NRTIs,
GSK1265744 showed efficacy against five different NNRTI-resistant or
NRTI-resistant viruses, with activity equivalent to that against
wild-type virus (fold change \[FC\] values ranged from 0.9 to 1.4).
Because rilpivirine (RPV) is being investigated in combination with
GSK1265744 in LA clinical studies ( 19 , 32 ), the FC values of six
different RPV signature mutants ranged from 1.0 to 1.3. Likewise,
GSK1265744 showed efficacy against two different PI-resistant viruses
(the M46I/I47V/I50V and L24I/M46I/L63P/A71V/G73S/V82T viruses), with
activity equivalent to that against wild-type virus (FC of 0.22 and
0.36, respectively).

### Cellular combination studies.

GSK1265744 was tested in combination studies with backbone NRTIs
(lamivudine, tenofovir, and emtricitabine) and the NNRTI RPV. There was
no antagonism observed with any combination, and there was no enhanced
cytotoxicity observed among the concentrations tested for antiviral
activity. In combination with NRTIs, GSK1265744 was weakly synergistic
with lamivudine, tenofovir, and emtricitabine. In combination with RPV,
GSK1265744 was weakly synergistic.

### Susceptibilities of INSTI-resistant molecular clones to GSK1265744.

A panel of 49 INSTI-resistant site-directed mutants (SDMs) was
constructed and tested for susceptibilities to GSK1265744 and other
INSTIs ( Table 2 ). Many of the DTG, RAL, EVG, and EFV susceptibilities
have been reported ( 14 ). These mutants were isolated during *in vitro*
passage studies with INSTIs and/or clinical trials of RAL, while a few
were derived from the literature. EFV was used as a control, with a
maximum FC against the INSTI-resistant mutants of 2.9-fold. Therefore,
the viruses with an FC of ≥3 were considered to be resistant in this
study. For descriptive purposes, we define an FC of more than 10 as
"high resistance."

TABLE 2

^a^

Each value represents the mean and SD for 3 to 5 independent
experiments, each performed in duplicate. FCs of \>10-fold are
highlighted in bold.

^b^

The mean FCs from one or two experiments are shown. The SD value could
not be analyzed.

^c^

ND, no data.

Among 25 single-amino-acid-substitution SDMs, most remained fully
susceptible to GSK1265744. However, the Q148K (FC = 5.6) and Q148R (FC =
5.1) variants, which were RAL-resistant primary mutants, resulted in
moderately reduced susceptibility to GSK1265744. Among 24 multimutated
SDMs, 6 mutant viruses (the E138A/Q148R, E138K/Q148K, E138K/Q148R,
G140C/Q148R, G140S/Q148R and Q148R/N155H variants) were highly resistant
to GSK1265744, with FC values of \>10. For comparison, of the 49 SDMs
tested, there were 2 mutants highly resistant to DTG, 24 resistant to
RAL, and 33 resistant to EVG, with FC values of \>10. Thus, the
resistance profile of GSK1265744 was different from those of RAL and EVG
and similar to that of DTG.

### Isolation of viruses resistant to GSK1265744 and RAL.

*In vitro* passage experiments were performed with GSK1265744 or RAL
starting with wild-type HIV-1 IIIB. Dose escalation patterns of
GSK1265744 and RAL are shown in Fig. 3a and b , respectively. Isolated
genotype and phenotype assay results are shown in Tables 3 and 4 . Each
passage started from 0.256, 1.28, 6.4, and 32 nM GSK1265744 or RAL, and
compound concentrations were increased in a stepwise manner when a
cytopathic effect was observed (reflecting a loss of antiviral activity
and a gain in viral replication). The final concentration of RAL
increased up to 800 nM or 4,000 nM ( Fig. 3b ). In contrast, no
replication was observed at concentrations of 32 nM or greater of
GSK1265744 throughout the passage experiment, except for day 53 in the
well culture which had started with 1.28 nM ( Fig. 3a ). Thus, the
maximum concentration of GSK1265744 allowing replication was 6.4 nM in
this assay.

FIG 3

TABLE 3

^a^

Fold changes (FCs) from the phenotype assay are shown in parentheses
after genotype assay results. When FCs of two wells are different, the
data are shown as a range.

TABLE 4

^a^

Fold changes from the phenotype assay are shown in parentheses after
genotype assay results. When FCs of three wells are different, the data
are shown as a range.

Under our isolation conditions as previously described, the M184V
lamivudine-resistant virus emerged on day 14 ( 14 ). In the culture with
GSK1265744 or RAL starting at any concentration except for GSK1265744 at
32 nM, T124A substitution was first observed on day 14 ( Tables 3 and 4
). However, IIIB contains ∼40% T124A at baseline, and the fold changes
of GSK1265744 and RAL to T124A SDM were 0.97 and 0.82, respectively.
Therefore, the T124A polymorphism has no impact on susceptibility to
GSK1265744 or RAL. In the RAL-containing passage experiments, a Q148K
RAL signature resistant virus emerged on day 28 when the culture was
started at 32 nM ( Fig. 3b and Table 4 ). An N155H/I204T variant emerged
on day 28 when the culture was started at 6.4 nM. A Q148R variant
emerged on day 42 when the culture was started at 1.28 nM. Q148K and
Q148R variants emerged on day 56 when the culture was started at 0.256
nM. Continuous culture selected for additional mutations at all
concentrations. Q148K and N155H/I204T variants emerged on day 28.
Overall, the barrier to resistance of RAL was higher than that of
lamivudine but lower than that of GSK1265744 in this assay.

In the case of GSK1265744, S153Y, Q146L (with culture started at 6.4
nM), and T124A/S153Y (with culture started at 0.256 nM) substitutions
were observed on day 56, and S153Y (with culture started at 1.28 nM) was
observed on day 70 ( Table 3 ). Interestingly, no other secondary
substitutions were added to each mutant virus up to day 112. The
T124A/I162M substitution was observed only once, on day 84, in the well
started with 1.28 nM, but this virus disappeared on day 88. We
constructed a T124A/I162M SDM and have confirmed that this mutant has
very low replication capacity and could not be evaluated for
susceptibility to GSK1265744 (data not shown). The substitutions
observed in the GSK1265744 passage study had no or minimal effects on
susceptibility to GSK1265744 when they were introduced into a laboratory
strain, NL432, by site-directed mutagenesis; FCs were 2.1 for the Q146L
variant, 2.0 for the S153Y variant, and 2.4 for the T124A/S153Y variant
( Table 2 ). Therefore, we confirmed that no virus highly resistant to
GSK1265744 was isolated *in vitro* up to 112 days of passage.

::: section

## DISCUSSION

INSTIs are generally recognized as a safe and effective class of
anti-HIV drugs. DTG, RAL, and EVG have all been recommended as
components for first-line therapy regimens in the most recent U.S. DHHS
guidelines ( 13 ). Clinical data indicate that viruses resistant to the
earlier INSTIs (RAL and EVG) have arisen ( 2 , 8 , 10 ). DTG and
GSK1265744 are clearly differentiated as new INSTIs. They are highly
effective against both wild-type and most INSTI-resistant mutants that
have been identified to date. DTG has been clinically demonstrated with
significantly less treatment-emergent INSTI or background therapy
resistance than RAL in the SAILING study through 48 weeks ( 33 ). Thus,
DTG could have a higher barrier to resistance clinically than RAL.
GSK1265744 has *in vitro* characteristics similar to those of DTG which
support its potential for having a high barrier to resistance. Herein,
we define "high barrier to resistance" *in vitro* as a mutant virus
which has more than a 3-fold change as SDM not emerging through more
than 100 days in our *in vitro* passage study. While the chemical
structure of GSK1265744 is related to that of DTG, GSK1265744 has unique
attributes (high protein binding, low solubility, and low plasma
clearance in animals). Consequently, the human oral PK data for
GSK1265744 indicate a longer half-life ( *t* ~1/2~ ) of approximately 32
h) ( 16 ). Preliminary evaluation of GSK1265744 LA in animals suggested
a possibility of parenteral once-monthly dosing in humans or possibly
less frequently. Based on its resistance and pharmacokinetic profiles,
GSK1265744 is in full clinical development as an LA formulation along
with an oral tablet for use in the induction phase.

The potency shift for GSK1265744 with 100% human serum is 408-fold,
which is consistent with a highly protein-bound molecule. Of note is the
fact that achieving plasma concentrations above the PA-EC ~90~ was still
anticipated due to PK measurements ( 16 ) and high intrinsic antiviral
efficacy. The clinical efficacy of GSK1265744 was demonstrated in a
10-day monotherapy trial at doses of 5 and 30 mg once daily ( 16 ); PK
measurements showed that trough concentrations above the PA-EC ~90~ were
achievable with these very low oral doses.

The *in vitro* experiments described here confirmed that the mechanism
of action of GSK1265744 is through inhibition of HIV IN at the strand
transfer step of viral DNA insertion into host DNA. The inhibitor had no
effect on total viral DNA synthesis in the infected cells but blocked
the integration of viral DNA into host DNA with the same potency as its
antiviral effect ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, GSK1265744 increased the
appearance of viral 2-LTR circles, a known by-product of integrase
inhibition with the same potency as other INSTIs ( 14 , 27 , 34 ). As
expected, GSK1265744 had efficacy against mutant viruses resistant to
NRTIs, NNRTIs, and PIs, similar to its potency against the wild-type
virus and consistent with its acting on a different antiretroviral
target. GSK1265744 maintained activity against single and several
multiple IN mutants but had decreased efficacy against a small subset of
multimutated viruses resistant to other INSTIs ( Table 2 ). *In vitro*
combination studies confirmed that GSK1265744 has no antagonistic effect
on all measured anti-HIV drugs across all classes, including likely
combination agents in the NRTI and NNRTI classes.

It is striking that GSK1265744 had significant efficacy against most
double or multiple integrase mutants in our panel of 24 mutants; only 6
mutant viruses (the E138A/Q148R, E138K/Q148K, E138K/Q148R, G140C/Q148R,
G140S/Q148R, and Q148R/N155H viruses) had a FC of \>10 ( Table 2 ). This
profile is similar to that of DTG, for which only 2 such mutants had a
FC of \>10. In contrast, RAL and EVG showed FC values of \>10 with 20
and 22 such mutants, respectively. Therefore, we conclude that
GSK1265744 has a new resistance profile similar to that of DTG.

Importantly, GSK1265744 showed potency against 25 INSTI-resistant single
mutants in our panel of INSTI-resistant SDMs that was approximately
equivalent to that of the wild type. The Q148 pathway confers a high
level of resistance to RAL and EVG. The Q148K (FC = 5.6) and Q148R (FC =
5.1) mutants gave rise to a moderate loss of efficacy for GSK1265744.
Given this moderate loss, we were curious as to whether Q148K/R would
arise in a passage study. Neither mutant was observed. From these
results, we surmise that the potential of resistance to GSK1265744
emerging may be very rare during clinical use for INSTI-naive patients.

Under our isolation conditions, the lamivudine-resistant M184V virus
emerged as expected on day 14 ( 14 ). Our RAL data suggested that there
was not sufficient pressure below 6.4 nM RAL to effectively select
resistant viruses. However, above that concentration, RAL-resistant
mutants were isolated, and the minimum culture period required for
resistance to RAL to develop was 28 days under our experimental
conditions.

In the case of GSK1265744, four mutant viruses (the Q146L, S153Y,
T124A/S153Y, and T124A/I162Mvariants) were isolated ( Table 3 ). Of note
is the fact that T124A is polymorphic and has no effect on GSK1265744
activity and that it was present in the starting inoculum of the passage
virus ( 35 ). However, as mentioned above, no Q148K/R or any other
RAL/EVG signature mutant virus was isolated up to 112 days. Among the
four isolated mutant viruses, we confirmed that three site-directed
molecular clones maintained sensitivity to GSK1265744 (FCs were less
than 2.9) ( Table 2 ), although the T124A/I162M virus could not be
evaluated because of its low replication capacity. These data were
consistent with the fact that we could not maintain viruses in a
GSK1265744 concentration at 32 nM ( Fig. 3a ). Interestingly, the Q146L
virus was a new resistant variant for EVG (FC = 13), although Q146P has
been reported ( 36 ).

The GSK1265744 data herein are consistent with our definition of a high
barrier to resistance *in vitro* . However, the high barrier to
resistance ultimately must be proven in controlled clinical trials. In a
clinical situation, there are many factors to consider, such as the drug
plasma trough concentration ( *C* ~tau~ ), drug binding affinity for the
IN enzyme, and adherence to drug therapy. One of the key factors is the
inhibitory quotient (IQ), which is defined as follows: IQ = *C* ~tau~
/PA-EC ~90~ . In the case of DTG, the mean *C* ~tau~ for a 50-mg
once-daily dose measured in the SPRING-1 and SPRING-2 treatment-naive
studies was 1.1 μg/ml (reference, Tivicay package insert); therefore,
the IQ was 17. For GSK1265744, the 30-mg oral daily dose gave a
geometric mean *C* ~tau~ of 3.28 μg/ml, for an IQ of 19.8 ( 16 ). The IQ
at 4 weeks after GSK1265744 LA 800-mg single-dose intramuscular
injection was approximately 12 ( 16 ). Thus, because the IQ for
GSK1265744 is similar to that of DTG, which has a proven clinically high
barrier to resistance ( 33 , 37 -- 39 ), in conjunction with its
encouraging *in vitro* resistance profile, we expect little if any
clinical failure due to resistance for the GSK1265744 treatment regimens
planned.

Recently, Quashie et al. reported that R263K and G118R were isolated *in
vitro* as potential DTG resistant viruses ( 40 ). Also, although fold
changes were less than 2 in a phenotype assay with isolated viruses, the
R263K and R263R/K variants were identified from two DTG-treated
virologic failure patients ( 33 ). Therefore, we evaluated the activity
of GSK1265744 against these mutant viruses. Our preliminary data are
that the fold change against the R263K variant was 1.3 ± 0.49 ( *n* = 3)
and the fold change against the G118R variant was 8.9 ± 0.86 ( *n* = 3).
We concluded that the R263K virus is not a resistant mutant for
GSK1265744 and the G118R variant is a potential resistant mutant.
However, the possibility of emergence of G118R during clinical use might
be very low because the replication capacity of G118R virus is very poor
( 41 ).

In conclusion, GSK1265744 has a markedly more distinct profile than RAL
and EVG in terms of cross-resistance and *in vitro* resistance passage
studies. These characteristics in combination with its excellent
antiviral efficacy and safety profile, as well as suitable PK from both
oral and LA injection regimens, should provide a novel treatment option
for patients. Taken together, the attributes of GSK1265744 may combine
to allow for durable efficacy in difficult-to-treat patient populations,
with improvement of compliance and quality of life, and provide an
attractive new option for both treatment and PrEP indications.

::: section

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We recognize the entire Shionogi-GSK HIV integrase drug discovery team
for the discovery and preclinical development of GSK1265744. In
addition, we thank Marty St Clair, Alex Rinehart, William Spreen, Louise
Martin-Carpenter, and Jim Demarest for critical reading.

::: section

## Fig 1

FIG 1 Chemical structures of the HIV-1 INSTIs used in this study. Raltegravir and Elvitegravir are earlier INSTIs. Dolutegravir and GSK1265744 are newer INSTIs.


## Fig 2

FIG 2 Effects of inhibitors on various forms of viral DNA were evaluated separately with HIV-1 NL432-infected MT-4 cells to determine the amounts of integrated viral DNA (a), 2-LTR circular viral DNA (b), or total viral DNA (c). The y axis of each graph represents amounts of DNA relative to those of the control. Each bar represents the mean value of results from three independent experiments. Error bars represent standard deviations.


## Fig 3

FIG 3 Long-term culture of infected MT-2 cells with escalating concentrations of INSTIs. MT-2 cells were infected with strain HIV-1 IIIB and passaged twice weekly in the presence of GSK1265744 (a) or RAL (b); the highest concentration at which the virus could replicate in cultured wells is indicated. The first points at which RAL signature mutants were observed in each RAL concentration are indicated by the oval callouts.


## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 for the structures of GSK1265744, DTG, RAL, and EVG.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , GSK1265744 inhibited integration of viral DNA ( Fig. 2a ) with a concomitant increase in 2-LTR circles ( Fig. 2b ) and no effect on viral DNA production ( Fig. 2c ). Furthermore, the concentration dependency of the effects was within the margin of error for the potency observed in the inhibition of viral replication in PBMCs and MT-4 cells. These effects were similar to those observed with RAL and DTG in our previous study ( 14 , 27 ) and were in contrast to the effects of the NNRTI EFV.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , GSK1265744 inhibited integration of viral DNA ( Fig. 2a ) with a concomitant increase in 2-LTR circles ( Fig. 2b ) and no effect on viral DNA production ( Fig. 2c ). Furthermore, the concentration dependency of the effects was within the margin of error for the potency observed in the inhibition of viral replication in PBMCs and MT-4 cells. These effects were similar to those observed with RAL and DTG in our previous study ( 14 , 27 ) and were in contrast to the effects of the NNRTI EFV.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , GSK1265744 inhibited integration of viral DNA ( Fig. 2a ) with a concomitant increase in 2-LTR circles ( Fig. 2b ) and no effect on viral DNA production ( Fig. 2c ). Furthermore, the concentration dependency of the effects was within the margin of error for the potency observed in the inhibition of viral replication in PBMCs and MT-4 cells. These effects were similar to those observed with RAL and DTG in our previous study ( 14 , 27 ) and were in contrast to the effects of the NNRTI EFV.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 , GSK1265744 inhibited integration of viral DNA ( Fig. 2a ) with a concomitant increase in 2-LTR circles ( Fig. 2b ) and no effect on viral DNA production ( Fig. 2c ). Furthermore, the concentration dependency of the effects was within the margin of error for the potency observed in the inhibition of viral replication in PBMCs and MT-4 cells. These effects were similar to those observed with RAL and DTG in our previous study ( 14 , 27 ) and were in contrast to the effects of the NNRTI EFV.


**Fig. 3 not found**



## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Table 2

**Table 2 not found**

## Table 3

**Table 3 not found**

## Table 4

**Table 4 not found**

## Table 5

**Table 5 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="2">    INSTI    <sup>     a    </sup></th><th rowspan="2">    Integrase inhibition, strand transfer IC    <sub>     50    </sub>    (nM)   </th><th colspan="4">    Antiviral activity   </th></tr><tr><th>    PBMC EC    <sub>     50    </sub>    (nM)   </th><th>    Potency shift with 100% HS (FC)    <sup>     b    </sup></th><th>    PA-EC    <sub>     50    </sub>    (nM)   </th><th>    PA-EC    <sub>     90    </sub>    (nM)   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   GSK1265744  </td><td>   3.0  </td><td>   0.25   <sup>    c   </sup></td><td>   408  </td><td>   102  </td><td>   408  </td></tr><tr><td>   Dolutegravir  </td><td>   2.7  </td><td>   0.51  </td><td>   75  </td><td>   38  </td><td>   152  </td></tr><tr><td>   Raltegravir  </td><td>   3.3  </td><td>   2.0  </td><td>   4.7  </td><td>   5.6  </td><td>   23  </td></tr><tr><td>   Elvitegravir  </td><td>   6  </td><td>   2.0  </td><td>   22  </td><td>   20  </td><td>   78  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="2">    Description of resistant virus   </th><th colspan="5">    Mean fold change in resistance vs. wild-type value    <sup>     a    </sup></th></tr><tr><th>    GSK1265744   </th><th>    Dolutegravir   </th><th>    Raltegravir   </th><th>    Elvitegravir   </th><th>    Efavirenz   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   Wild type  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.0  </td><td>   1.0  </td></tr><tr><td>   T66A  </td><td>   0.31 ± 0.03  </td><td>   0.26 ± 0.010  </td><td>   0.61 ± 0.090  </td><td>   4.1 ± 0.83  </td><td>   1.3 ± 0.026  </td></tr><tr><td>   T66I  </td><td>   0.33 ± 0.08  </td><td>   0.26 ± 0.090  </td><td>   0.51 ± 0.10  </td><td>   8.0 ± 1.7  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.23  </td></tr><tr><td>   T66K  </td><td>   2.7 ± 0.44  </td><td>   2.3 ± 0.35  </td><td>   9.6 ± 1.3  </td><td>   84 ± 29  </td><td>   2.1 ± 0.28  </td></tr><tr><td>   E92I  </td><td>   1.8 ± 0.21  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.19  </td><td>   2.1 ± 0.62  </td><td>   8.0 ± 1.9  </td><td>   1.0 ± 0.30  </td></tr><tr><td>   E92Q  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.11  </td><td>   1.6 ± 0.12  </td><td>   3.5 ± 1.4  </td><td>   19 ± 8.1  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.22  </td></tr><tr><td>   E92V  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.15  </td><td>   1.3 ± 0.20  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.18  </td><td>   8.3 ± 1.5  </td><td>   0.93 ± 0.29  </td></tr><tr><td>   G118S  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.35  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.21  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.30  </td><td>   4.9   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   0.73   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   F121Y  </td><td>   1.0 ± 0.28  </td><td>   0.81 ± 0.12  </td><td>   6.1 ± 1.3  </td><td>   36 ± 23  </td><td>   2.1 ± 0.14  </td></tr><tr><td>   T124A  </td><td>   0.97 ± 0.15  </td><td>   0.95 ± 0.19  </td><td>   0.82 ± 0.080  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.29  </td><td>   0.95 ± 0.12  </td></tr><tr><td>   G140S  </td><td>   0.81 ± 0.11  </td><td>   0.86 ± 0.30  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.22  </td><td>   2.7 ± 0.63  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.12  </td></tr><tr><td>   Y143C  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.29  </td><td>   0.95 ± 0.26  </td><td>   3.2 ± 0.57  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.46  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.23  </td></tr><tr><td>   Y143H  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.21  </td><td>   0.89 ± 0.11  </td><td>   1.8 ± 0.38  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.047  </td><td>   1.3 ± 0.32  </td></tr><tr><td>   Y143R  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.22  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.29  </td><td>   16 ± 3.9  </td><td>   1.8 ± 0.16  </td><td>   0.98 ± 0.041  </td></tr><tr><td>   P145S  </td><td>   0.43 ± 0.03  </td><td>   0.49 ± 0.080  </td><td>   0.87 ± 0.20  </td><td>   &gt;350  </td><td>   2.9 ± 0.28  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q146L  </td><td>   2.1 ± 1.2  </td><td>   ND   <sup>    c   </sup></td><td>   0.93 ± 0.08  </td><td>   13 ± 2.5  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.2  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q146R  </td><td>   1.7 ± 0.25  </td><td>   1.6 ± 0.17  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.26  </td><td>   2.8 ± 0.72  </td><td>   0.94 ± 0.40  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q148H  </td><td>   0.86 ± 0.12  </td><td>   0.97 ± 0.67  </td><td>   13 ± 5.0  </td><td>   7.3 ± 2.3  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.83  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q148K  </td><td>   5.6 ± 0.61  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.19  </td><td>   83 ± 6.6  </td><td>   &gt;1700  </td><td>   2.1 ± 0.26  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q148R  </td><td>   5.1 ± 1.8  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.21  </td><td>   47 ± 9.3  </td><td>   240 ± 91  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.21  </td></tr><tr><td>   I151L  </td><td>   2.5 ± 0.48  </td><td>   3.6 ± 3.6  </td><td>   8.4 ± 4.7  </td><td>   29   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   2.9 ± 0.67  </td></tr><tr><td>   S153Y  </td><td>   2.0 ± 0.63  </td><td>   2.5 ± 1.1  </td><td>   1.3 ± 0.19  </td><td>   2.3 ± 0.49  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.18  </td></tr><tr><td>   M154I  </td><td>   0.87 ± 0.1  </td><td>   0.93 ± 0.27  </td><td>   0.82 ± 0.18  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.18  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.14  </td></tr><tr><td>   N155H  </td><td>   1.7 ± 0.18  </td><td>   0.99 ± 0.094  </td><td>   8.4 ± 1.8  </td><td>   25 ± 7.8  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.044  </td></tr><tr><td>   N155S  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.29  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.36  </td><td>   6.2 ± 1.9  </td><td>   68 ± 26  </td><td>   1.7 ± 0.09  </td></tr><tr><td>   N155T  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.26  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.32  </td><td>   5.2 ± 2.0  </td><td>   39   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.5 ± 0.43  </td></tr><tr><td>   T66I/L74 M  </td><td>   0.38 ± 0.11  </td><td>   0.35 ± 0.080  </td><td>   2.0 ± 0.81  </td><td>   14   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.2 ± 0.015  </td></tr><tr><td>   T66I/E92Q  </td><td>   1.0 ± 0.38  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.19  </td><td>   18 ± 3.6  </td><td>   190 ± 100  </td><td>   2.0 ± 0.20  </td></tr><tr><td>   T66K/L74 M  </td><td>   6.3 ± 1.8  </td><td>   3.5 ± 0.94  </td><td>   40 ± 13  </td><td>   120 ± 33  </td><td>   2.0 ± 0.25  </td></tr><tr><td>   L74 M/N155H  </td><td>   2.5 ± 0.041  </td><td>   0.91 ± 0.17  </td><td>   28 ± 12  </td><td>   42 ± 8.6  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.24  </td></tr><tr><td>   E92Q/N155H  </td><td>   5.3 ± 2.8  </td><td>   2.5 ± 1.2  </td><td>   &gt;130  </td><td>   320 ± 39  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.71  </td></tr><tr><td>   T97A/N155H  </td><td>   2.9 ± 0.27  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.46  </td><td>   26 ± 7.9  </td><td>   37 ± 6.9  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.14  </td></tr><tr><td>   F121Y/T125K  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.55  </td><td>   0.98 ± 0.35  </td><td>   11 ± 0.49  </td><td>   34   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.5   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   T124A/S153Y  </td><td>   2.4 ± 0.1  </td><td>   ND   <sup>    c   </sup></td><td>   1.5 ± 0.44  </td><td>   4 ± 0.4  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.46  </td></tr><tr><td>   E138A/Q148R  </td><td>   13 ± 0.86  </td><td>   2.6 ± 0.47  </td><td>   110   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   260 ± 12  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.090  </td></tr><tr><td>   E138K/Q148H  </td><td>   0.92 ± 0.08  </td><td>   0.89 ± 0.24  </td><td>   17 ± 5.9  </td><td>   6.7 ± 1.5  </td><td>   1.0 ± 0.47  </td></tr><tr><td>   E138K/Q148K  </td><td>   81 ± 24  </td><td>   19 ± 8.0  </td><td>   330 ± 75  </td><td>   371   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.2   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   E138K/Q148R  </td><td>   12 ± 3.4  </td><td>   4.0 ± 1.1  </td><td>   110 ± 37  </td><td>   460 ± 230  </td><td>   1.0 ± 0.31  </td></tr><tr><td>   G140C/Q148R  </td><td>   22 ± 4.9  </td><td>   4.9 ± 1.8  </td><td>   200 ± 42  </td><td>   485   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   2.8   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   G140S/Q148H  </td><td>   6.1 ± 0.75  </td><td>   2.6 ± 1.4  </td><td>   &gt;130  </td><td>   &gt;890  </td><td>   1.7 ± 0.99  </td></tr><tr><td>   G140S/Q148K  </td><td>   5.6 ± 2.5  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.10  </td><td>   3.7 ± 1.3  </td><td>   94 ± 53  </td><td>   1.3 ± 0.39  </td></tr><tr><td>   G140S/Q148R  </td><td>   12 ± 3.5  </td><td>   8.4 ± 4.0  </td><td>   200 ± 5.3  </td><td>   267   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.5   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   Y143H/N155H  </td><td>   6.2 ± 1.9  </td><td>   1.7 ± 0.27  </td><td>   38   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   16 ± 4.6  </td><td>   1.5 ± 0.28  </td></tr><tr><td>   Q148R/N155H  </td><td>   61 ± 28  </td><td>   10 ± 1.4  </td><td>   &gt;140  </td><td>   390   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.7 ± 0.15  </td></tr><tr><td>   N155H/G163K  </td><td>   1.6 ± 0.26  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.40  </td><td>   23 ± 7.2  </td><td>   35 ± 4.4  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.10  </td></tr><tr><td>   N155H/G163R  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.28  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.18  </td><td>   17 ± 5.9  </td><td>   35 ± 12  </td><td>   1.1 ± 0.16  </td></tr><tr><td>   N155H/D232N  </td><td>   2.5 ± 0.39  </td><td>   1.4 ± 0.25  </td><td>   20 ± 3.9  </td><td>   36 ± 7.1  </td><td>   0.92 ± 0.050  </td></tr><tr><td>   V72I/F121Y/T125K  </td><td>   2.0 ± 0.61  </td><td>   1.3 ± 0.54  </td><td>   13 ± 7.1  </td><td>   58   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.5   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr><tr><td>   E138A/S147G/Q148R  </td><td>   3.7 ± 0.98  </td><td>   1.9 ± 0.89  </td><td>   27 ± 3.7  </td><td>   130 ± 8.8  </td><td>   0.83 ± 0.032  </td></tr><tr><td>   V72I/F121Y/T125K/I151V  </td><td>   1.6 ± 0.66  </td><td>   1.2 ± 0.32  </td><td>   7.0 ± 2.8  </td><td>   37   <sup>    b   </sup></td><td>   1.1   <sup>    b   </sup></td></tr></table>

## Any table 2

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="2">    Initial conc (nM)   </th><th rowspan="2">    Concn (nM)   </th><th colspan="8">    Substitution (FC in resistance) at day:   </th></tr><tr><th>    14   </th><th>    28   </th><th>    42   </th><th>    56   </th><th>    70   </th><th>    84   </th><th>    98   </th><th>    112   </th></tr></thead><tr><td>   32  </td><td>   32  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td><td>   Nonreplication  </td></tr><tr><td>   6.4  </td><td>   6.4  </td><td>   None (1.8–2.0); T124A (1.9)  </td><td>   None (2.0); T124A (2.2)  </td><td>   None  </td><td>   None (4.2); S153Y (4.7); Q146L (3.3)  </td><td>   None (3.4); S153Y (4.7); Q146L (2.1)  </td><td>   None (4.2); S153Y (5.1); Q146L (2.9)  </td><td>   None (4.1); S153Y (4.7); Q146L (3.9)  </td><td>   None (4.9); S153Y (5.1); Q146L (4.6)  </td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">   1.28  </td><td>   6.4  </td><td></td><td>   T124A (2.4–5.5)  </td><td>   None (3.3); T124A (2.7)  </td><td>   None (3.7–4.6); T124A (2.4)  </td><td>   None (5.1); T124A (4.6); S153Y (3.9)  </td><td>   T124A (4.9–5.1); S153Y (4.3)  </td><td>   T124A (4.6–5.2); S153Y (6.0)  </td><td>   T124A (3.3); S153Y (5.6)  </td></tr><tr><td>   1.28  </td><td>   T124A (1.1–1.6)  </td><td>   T124A (1.4–1.7)  </td><td>   T124A (1.7–2.8)  </td><td>   T124A (1.1–2.0)  </td><td>   T124A (1.2–2.6)  </td><td>   T124A (2.4–2.5); T124A, I162M (2.8)  </td><td>   T124A (1.3–1.6)  </td><td>   T124A (1.4–1.5)  </td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">   0.256  </td><td>   6.4  </td><td></td><td>   T124A (2.5–2.8)  </td><td>   T124A (3.1–4.0)  </td><td>   T124A (3.7–4.6); T124A/S153Y (6.4)  </td><td>   T124A (2.8–3.7); T124A/S153Y (5.1)  </td><td>   T124A (4.3–5.7); T124A/S153Y (8.4)  </td><td>   T124A (3.9–4.5); T124A/S153Y (6.3)  </td><td>   T124A (3.3–5.9); T124A/S153Y (6.6)  </td></tr><tr><td>   1.28  </td><td>   T124A (1.4–1.6)  </td><td>   T124A (1.9–2.3)  </td><td>   T124A (1.2–2.0)  </td><td>   T124A (1.8–2.5)  </td><td>   T124A (1.6–3.1)  </td><td>   T124A (1.3–2.4)  </td><td>   T124A (1.6–2.2)  </td><td>   T124A (1.1–1.9)  </td></tr><tr><td>   0.256  </td><td>   T124A (1.2–1.4)  </td><td>   T124A (2.5–2.9)  </td><td>   T124A (&lt;0.88)  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

## Any table 3

<table><thead><tr><th rowspan="2">    Initial concn (nM)   </th><th rowspan="2">    Concn (nM)   </th><th colspan="6">    Substitution (FC in resistance) at day:   </th></tr><tr><th>    14   </th><th>    28   </th><th>    42   </th><th>    56   </th><th>    70   </th><th>    84   </th></tr></thead><tr><td rowspan="4">   32  </td><td>   4,000  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   G140C/Q148K/G163R (&gt;160)  </td><td>   G140C/Q148K/G163R (&gt;138)  </td></tr><tr><td>   800  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   Q148K (111)  </td><td>   G140C/Q148K (&gt;160)  </td><td>   G140C/Q148K/G163R (&gt;138)  </td></tr><tr><td>   160  </td><td></td><td>   Q148K (&gt;23)  </td><td>   Q148K (11)  </td><td>   Q148K/G163R (38)  </td><td>   Q148K/G163R (149)  </td><td>   E138K/Q148K/G163R (&gt;138)  </td></tr><tr><td>   32  </td><td>   T124A (1.5–2.2)  </td><td>   T124A (0.65–0.78); Q148K (20)  </td><td>   T124A (1.1); Q148K (8.0)  </td><td>   T124A (1.6); Q148K (29)  </td><td>   T124A (1.3); Q148K (56)  </td><td>   T124A (2.0); Q148K (38)  </td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">   6.4  </td><td>   4,000  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   G140S/Q148R (&gt;160)  </td><td>   G140S/Q148R (&gt;138); T124A/V151I/N155H (&gt;138)  </td></tr><tr><td>   800  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   G140S/Q148R (&gt;160); T124A/V151I/N155H (65)  </td><td>   G140S/Q148R (&gt;138); T124A/V151I/N155H (37)  </td></tr><tr><td>   160  </td><td></td><td>   T124A (0.71–0.91)  </td><td>   N155H (19)  </td><td>   Q148R (11); N155H (9.7)  </td><td>   Q148R (11); V151I/N155H (5.4)  </td><td>   Q148R (9.5); V151I/N155H (13)  </td></tr><tr><td>   32  </td><td>   T124A (2.2–2.5)  </td><td>   N155H/I204T (20 -&gt;23); T124A (1.1–1.3)  </td><td>   N155H/I204T (10); G59E (1.4)  </td><td>   Q148R (11); N155H/I204T (6.0)  </td><td>   Q148R (11–24); N155H/I204T (8.0)  </td><td>   N155H/I204T (6.4)  </td></tr><tr><td>   6.4  </td><td>   T124A (1.1–1.5)  </td><td>   T124A (0.62–1.1)  </td><td>   T124A (0.93–1.1)  </td><td>   T124A (0.90–1.2)  </td><td>   T124A (1.0–1.6)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">   1.28  </td><td>   800  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   T124A (0.40); E138K/Q148R (28)  </td></tr><tr><td>   160  </td><td></td><td></td><td>   Q148R (9.5); T124A (2.2–7.6)  </td><td>   Q148R (19); T124A (0.70)  </td><td>   Q148R (31)  </td><td>   Q148R (25)  </td></tr><tr><td>   32  </td><td></td><td>   T124A (0.66–0.71)  </td><td>   Q148R (8.4); T124A (2.2–7.6)  </td><td>   Q148R (18); T124A (2.0–3.5)  </td><td>   Q148R (8.4); T124A (1.6–1.7)  </td><td>   Q148R (15); T124A (1.5–2.4)  </td></tr><tr><td>   6.4  </td><td>   T124A (0.89–1.0)  </td><td>   T124A (0.64–0.79)  </td><td>   T124A (0.94–0.97)  </td><td>   T124A (0.90–1.1)  </td><td>   T124A (0.50–1.0)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   1.28  </td><td>   T124A (0.68–0.76)  </td><td>   T124A (0.54–0.65)  </td><td>   T124A (0.84–0.91)  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="7">   0.256  </td><td>   4,000  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   E92Q/M154I (1.9)  </td><td>   E92Q/E138K/Q148K/M154I (34)  </td></tr><tr><td>   800  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>   N17S/Q148K (124); E92Q/M154I (63)  </td><td>   N17S/Q148K/G163R (75); E138K/Q148K (70)  </td></tr><tr><td>   160  </td><td></td><td></td><td>   None (1.1)  </td><td>   Q148K (27); E92Q/M154I (3.1)  </td><td>   N17S/Q148K (78); E92Q/M154I (6.8)  </td><td>   N17S/Q148K/G163R (24); E138K/Q148K (40)  </td></tr><tr><td>   32  </td><td></td><td>   T124A (0.89–3.7)  </td><td>   T124A (0.99-&gt;61)  </td><td>   Q148R (8.8); T124A (4.6)  </td><td>   Q148R (6.8); T124A (1.0)  </td><td>   Q148R (11); T124A (1.2)  </td></tr><tr><td>   6.4  </td><td></td><td>   T124A (0.63–0.83)  </td><td>   T124A (0.43–0.84)  </td><td>   T124A (0.90–1.1)  </td><td>   T124A (0.50–0.70)  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   1.28  </td><td>   T124A (0.66–0.80)  </td><td>   T124A (0.64–0.70)  </td><td>   T124A (0.72–0.94)  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>   0.256  </td><td>   T124A (0.54–0.85)  </td><td>   T124A (0.54–0.64)  </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>



