# Effects of Raltegravir or Elvitegravir Resistance Signature Mutations on the Barrier to Dolutegravir Resistance *In Vitro*


## ABSTRACT

The recently approved HIV-1 integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI)
dolutegravir (DTG) (S/GSK1349572) has overall advantageous activity when
tested *in vitro* against HIV-1 with raltegravir (RAL) and elvitegravir
(EVG) resistance signature mutations. We conducted an *in vitro*
resistance selection study using wild-type HIV-1 and mutants with the
E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, Q148H, Q148K, Q148R, and N155H substitutions to
assess the DTG *in vitro* barrier to resistance. No viral replication
was observed at concentrations of ≥32 nM DTG, whereas viral replication
was observed at 160 nM RAL or EVG in the mutants. In the Q148H, Q148K,
or Q148R mutants, G140S/Q148H, E138K/Q148K, E138K/Q148R, and G140S/Q148R
secondary mutations were identified with each INSTI and showed high
resistance to RAL or EVG but limited resistance to DTG. E138K and G140S,
as secondary substitutions to Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R, were associated
with partial recovery in viral infectivity and/or INSTI resistance. In
the E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, and N155H mutants, no secondary substitutions
were associated with DTG. These *in vitro* results suggest that DTG has
a high barrier to the development of resistance in the presence of RAL
or EVG signature mutations other than Q148. One explanation for this
high barrier to resistance is that no additional secondary substitution
of E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, or N155H simultaneously increased the fold change
in 50% effective concentration (EC ~50~ ) to DTG and infectivity.
Although increased DTG resistance via the Q148 pathway and secondary
substitutions occurs at low concentrations, a higher starting
concentration may reduce or eliminate the development of DTG resistance
in this pathway *in vitro* .

::: section


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Compounds.

DTG was synthesized at Shionogi Research Laboratories (Osaka, Japan).
EVG was synthesized at GSK (Research Triangle Park, NC). RAL, efavirenz
(EFV), and lamivudine (3TC) were purchased from Sequoia Research
Products (Pangbourne, United Kingdom).

### Cells and viruses.

HeLa-CD4 cells carrying a reporter β-galactosidase gene driven by the
HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) were established by transfecting HeLa
cells with CD4 and β-galactosidase expression vector ( 21 ). Human
T-cell lines (MT-2, MT-4, and M8166) were obtained from the Institute
for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan ( 22 ). HeLa-CD4
cells were grown in Dulbecco\'s modified minimal essential medium (DMEM)
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 60 μg/ml kanamycin sulfate.
Human T-cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with
10% FBS and 60 μg/ml kanamycin sulfate. Molt-4 cells persistently
infected with the HIV-1 IIIB strain were obtained from S. Harada
(Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan), and the cell culture supernatant
of Molt-4/IIIB was used as an HIV-1 IIIB virus solution. HIV-1 strain
NL432 was obtained from A. Adachi (Tokushima University, Tokushima,
Japan) ( 23 ).

### Construction of HIV-1 site-directed molecular clones.

The recombinant HIV-1 molecular clones were constructed as follows. The
XbaI-EcoR I fragment from pNL-IN301 (pNL432 with the XbaI site inserted
into the 5′ end of the IN region) was cloned at the XbaI-EcoR I site of
cloning vector pUC18. *In vitro* mutagenesis was performed with the
QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA)
using a pUC18 plasmid containing the IN-encoding region as a template.
The amplified mutated XbaI-EcoR I fragment was ligated into pNL-IN301 to
construct recombinant HIV-1 molecular clones. The plasmids were
subsequently transfected into 293T cells by Lipofectamine 2000 (Life
Technologies/Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) to generate infectious viruses.
The supernatants were harvested 2 days after transfection and stored as
cell-free viral stocks at −80°C.

### Selection of drug-resistant viruses.

INSTI-resistant HIV-1 mutants were expanded in fresh MT-2 cells, and the
viral titers were normalized with reverse transcriptase (RT) activity.
For the initial infection, medium containing dilutions of the test
compound was distributed into the plate. An MT-2 cell suspension (3 × 10
^5^ cells) was dispensed into each well of a 24-well tissue culture
plate, and then MT-2 cells infected with INSTI-resistant HIV-1, prepared
as described above, were added to each well. The passage study was
performed in duplicate.

Every 3 or 4 days, the cells were passaged with or without the addition
of fresh MT-2 cells. If a cytopathic effect (CPE) was observed, the
culture medium, including the infected cells, was dispensed into a new
plate with fresh MT-2 cell suspensions, and the concentration of the
compound was held constant and/or increased 5-fold in medium containing
the test compounds. If a CPE was not observed, the cells were cultivated
without adding fresh MT-2 cells. When the replication of viruses was
ascertained by an observed CPE, the infected cells were collected and
used for genotypic and phenotypic analyses. We confirmed that all mutant
viruses were able to replicate continuously with 6.4 nM DTG (data not
shown) and thus selected initial drug concentrations of 6.4, 32, or 160
nM for use in this study. These concentrations are in good agreement
with those used in our previous study.

### Genotypic analyses of HIV-1 proviral DNA.

To analyze the amino acid substitutions, DNA was extracted from infected
cells using a DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), and
the IN region of HIV-1 proviral DNA was amplified by PCR using a TaKaRa
*Taq* DNA polymerase kit (TaKaRa, Shiga, Japan) and specific primers.
The sequencing of the products was entrusted to the Operon
Biotechnologies sequencing service (Tokyo, Japan). The sequence of the
IN region derived from isolated viruses was compared with that of the
wild-type NL432 IN region, and amino acid substitutions were identified.

### Phenotypic analyses of viral isolates and drug-resistant molecular clones.

The drug sensitivities of the viruses isolated during the passage study
and the drug-resistant molecular clones were assessed by a reporter
assay with HeLa-CD4 cells, as described previously ( 24 , 25 ). Briefly,
viral isolates from the passage study were expanded in fresh M8166
cells. The test compounds were diluted to appropriate concentrations
with culture medium, and HeLa-CD4 cell suspensions (2.5 × 10 ^4^
cells/well) were dispensed into each plate. After 3 days of incubation,
the cells were lysed, and the supernatant of each well was used for
measuring luminescent activity using the Reporter assay kit-β-gal
(Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). The luminescent activity (in relative
luminescence units \[RLU\]) was measured using a MicroBeta TriLux
instrument (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA). The effective drug concentration
reducing HIV-1 replication to 50% (EC ~50~ ) was calculated.

### Determination of relative infectivity of the integrase mutant molecular clones.

The relative infectivities of the IN mutant molecular clones were
measured using HeLa-CD4 cells, as described previously ( 24 , 25 ).
Wild-type or mutant viruses were diluted serially with culture medium,
and HeLa-CD4 cell suspensions (2.5 × 10 ^4^ cells/well) were dispensed
into each plate. After 3 days of incubation, virus-induced
β-galactosidase activity was measured as described above. To evaluate
the relative infectivity, virus-induced β-galactosidase activity was
normalized by the RT activity of the input virus. The RT-normalized
infectivity of the wild-type virus was defined as 100%, and the relative
infectivity of each resistant virus was calculated in proportion to its
induced β-galactosidase activity.

::: section

## RESULTS

### Resistance selection with dolutegravir and other INSTIs.

The *in vitro* passage experiments were assayed with DTG, RAL, or EVG in
wild-type NL432 and RAL- or EVG-resistant HIV-1 molecular clones with
the E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, Q148H, Q148K, Q148R or N155H substitution. The
dose escalation curves for each resistance selection study are shown in
Fig. 1 , and the results of genotype assay at each time point are shown
in Table 1 .

FIG 1

TABLE 1

^a^

Data from a single experiment, which was performed in duplicate. ND, not
determined, because the low viral titer of the culture supernatant did
not provide enough signal to evaluate the EC ~50~ .

The resistance selection studies of each drug were started with
concentrations of 6.4, 32, or 160 nM each, and the compound
concentrations were increased in a stepwise manner. Table 1 and Fig. 1
show the viral replication for each drug concentration. Viral
replication was detected at all concentrations of RAL and EVG and in
every strain, except for wild-type NL432 in both drugs at a
concentration of 160 nM. The concentrations of RAL or EVG were able to
be increased and emerging IN-resistant mutants allowed to replicate at
up to 800 or 4,000 nM, respectively. In contrast, no viral replication
was detected with an initial exposure to 32 nM or 160 nM DTG in the
wild-type NL432 virus and all mutant viruses. When initially exposed to
6.4 nM DTG, the viruses were able to replicate, but if the DTG
concentration was increased during the passage at or beyond 160 nM,
complete viral suppression occurred.

Genotypic analyses of wild-type NL432 exposed to RAL showed that the
N155H substitution was observed on day 28, the F121Y and Q148R
substitutions were observed on day 42, and the F121Y/D232N and
N155S/D232N double substitutions were observed on day 56. When wild-type
viruses were exposed to EVG, the Q148R substitution was observed on day
14, the T66A and N155H substitutions were observed on day 28, the
E92Q/N155H double substitution was observed on day 42, and the
E138K/Q148R and E92Q/N155H/R263K substitutions were observed at day 56.
When the wild-type viruses were exposed to DTG, the E92Q and G193E
substitutions were observed on day 56.

Genotypic analyses of mutations with the E92Q substitution showed that
the only changes detected were the combined secondary substitutions
L74M/E92Q on day 42 of exposure to RAL; no secondary substitution was
detected with EVG or DTG.

Genotypic analyses of the N155H mutant exposed to RAL detected secondary
substitutions S119R/N155H, N155H/D232N, and P142T/N155H/G163R observed
on day 42 and G70R/N155H and N155H/G163R/D232N on day 56. When exposed
to EVG, G70R/V75I/N155H was observed on day 28, and N155H/S230K,
N155H/D232N, and N155H/E170K were observed on day 42. No additional
substitution was detected when the N155H mutants were exposed to DTG.

With Y143C mutants exposed to RAL starting at a concentration of 6.4 or
32 nM, Y143C was replaced by Y143R on day 28 and persisted throughout
the remaining passages. Additionally, the secondary substitutions
E92Q/Y143R and Y143R/G163R were observed on day 56. Starting from 160 nM
RAL, revertant Y143 virus harboring G163R from the Y143C initial mutant
virus was also detected on day 42, and the additional G163R/E170A
substitutions were observed on day 56 during passage with RAL starting
at a concentration of 160 nM. In the case of DTG, no additional
substitutions were detected, and no viral replication was observed after
day 28 with all concentrations of DTG.

With Y143R mutants exposed to RAL, L74M/Y143R and Y143R/N155H were
detected on day 56, whereas no additional substitution was detected with
DTG.

With the strains carrying the Q148K substitution that were exposed to
RAL, EVG, or DTG, E138K/Q148K was observed on day 14 or 28 and persisted
throughout the remaining passages.

With Q148R exposed to RAL, L74M/Q148R and G140S/Q148R were observed on
day 28, L74M/G140S/Q148R was observed on day 42, and G140S/Q148R/V259I
was observed on day 56. With EVG, E138K/Q148R was observed on day 56.
With DTG, E138K/Q148R and G140S/Q148R were observed on days 14 and 28,
respectively, and E138K/G140S/Q148R and G140S/Q148R/V201I were observed
on day 56.

With the strains carrying the Q148H substitution that were exposed to
RAL or EVG, G140S/Q148H was observed on day 14 and persisted throughout
the remaining passages. In the case of DTG, G140S/Q148H was observed on
day 14, and T97A/G140S/Q148H and V75I/E138K/G140S/Q148H/M154I were
observed on day 56.

### Sensitivities of site-directed molecular clones identified in DTG resistance selection study to INSTIs.

The *in vitro* selection of DTG resistance in wild-type or Q148H, Q148K,
or Q148R mutants resulted in emerging amino acid substitutions in the IN
region. Several INSTI-resistant SDMs were constructed and evaluated for
their susceptibilities to DTG, RAL, and EVG, and the fold change in EC
~50~ (FC) was compared ( Table 2 ), using EFV as a reference compound.
From wild-type NL432, E92Q and G193E were isolated in 6.4 nM DTG but did
not reduce the antiviral activity of DTG. In the Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R
mutants, RAL and EVG had reduced activities against all mutants with the
secondary mutations identified in this study (FC, \>130). The mutants
with the G140S/Q148R, E138K/G140S/Q148R, E138K/G140S/Q148H, and
E138K/G140S/Q148H/M154I substitutions showed moderate resistance to DTG
(FCs, 8.4, 8.3, 4.5, and 8.4, respectively), and the mutants with the
E138K/Q148K, G140S/Q148R/V201I, T97A/G140S/Q148H, and
V75I/E138K/G140S/Q148H/M154I substitutions showed high resistance to DTG
(FCs, 19, 10, 13, and 21, respectively).

TABLE 2

^a^

Each value represents the mean FC. The standard deviations from 3 to 5
independent experiments are shown in parentheses. Each data point was
calculated from duplicate experiments. FC values of \>10 are shown in
bold type.

^b^

Data from one or two experiments.

### Effect on viral infectivity of integrase mutants.

The relative infectivities of the mutant viruses in the absence of
INSTIs were also measured using the single-cycle reporter assay with
HeLa-CD4 cells ( Fig. 2 ). Q148K reduced infectivity to 11%, although
adding the E138K substitution partially restored its infectivity to 36%
( Fig. 2a ). Similarly, the relative infectivity of the Q148R mutant
virus was reduced to 19%, whereas the subsequent addition of the E138K
substitution partially restored its infectivity to 40% ( Fig. 2a ).
Also, the relative infectivity of the Q148H mutant was reduced to 27%,
whereas the subsequent addition of the G140S substitution partially
restored its infectivity to 72%. However, the differences in the viral
infectivity of Q148R versus those of the mutants with the G140S/Q148R,
E138K/G140S/Q148R, or G140S/Q148R/V201I substitutions were not
statistically significant. On the contrary, the relative infectivity of
the mutant with the V75I/E138K/G140S/Q148H/M154I substitutions (49%) was
reduced from that of the mutant with the E138K/G140S/Q148H/M154I
substitutions (76%) ( Fig. 2b ). Therefore, further additional
substitutions to G140S/Q148H, which were introduced only while selecting
for DTG resistance, did not restore viral infectivity but exhibited
higher INSTI resistance.

FIG 2

::: section

## DISCUSSION

DTG has low-nanomolar EC ~50~ s against both wild-type HIV-1 and many
resistant mutants to previously approved INSTIs *in vitro* . A
difficulty in generating variants with high-level phenotypic resistance
to DTG from the wild-type virus was reported ( 20 ) and suggests that
DTG has a high barrier to resistance against wild-type virus *in vitro*
.

In mutant HIV-1 with the RAL and EVG resistance mutations encoded by the
E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, and N155H substitutions, viral replication was not
observed in medium containing ≥32 nM DTG. In the Y143C mutants, viral
replication was not detected for 28 days, even at an exposure of 6.4 nM
DTG. However, in the Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R mutant viruses, secondary
substitutions were observed when the initial concentration was 6.4 nM
DTG. In particular, the emergence of E138K during passage with the Q148K
and Q148R mutant viruses and G140S for the Q148R mutant was associated
with the partial restoration of viral infectivity and/or an increase in
resistance to INSTIs ( Fig. 2a and Table 2 ). We previously reported
that partial restorations of infectivity of these substitutions were
associated with viral replication capacity and the partial restoration
of viral DNA integration efficiency, measured by replication kinetics in
PBMC or Jurkat cells and by the amount of integrated viral DNA ( 25 ).
However, the emergence of the E138K or V201I substitution when
G140S/Q148R was present had no impact on viral infectivity and the FC
values against DTG. Although the explanation for the propagation of the
additional substitution was unclear, a slight advantage in viral
replication in cell culture is one possibility. When the Q148H mutant
was exposed to DTG, the additional emergence of G140S was observed,
followed by the addition of T97A or V75I/E138K/M154I. The emergence of
G140S in the Q148H mutant provided a partial restoration of viral
infectivity ( Fig. 2b ) and also increased resistance to RAL and EVG but
not to DTG ( Table 2 ). The addition of the T97A substitution to G140S
and Q148H provided no impact on viral infectivity and was selected
solely on the basis of increased resistance to DTG. The addition of the
V75I, E138K, and M154I substitutions was associated with an 8-fold
increase in DTG resistance instead of further reduced infectivity versus
that of G140S/Q148H. The FC value of the G140S/Q148R substitutions with
EVG was similar to that of Q148R. In contrast, the FC value of the
E138K/Q148R substitutions with EVG was higher than that of the
G140S/Q148R substitutions, and partially restored infectivity was also
observed ( Fig. 2a and Table 2 ); this suggests that the E138K/Q148R
substitutions apparently provide a greater advantage than do the
G140S/Q148R substitutions to viral replication in the presence of EVG.
The drug resistance of the G140S/Q148H substitutions to RAL or EVG was
high, and the addition of a third mutation may not have been required
for higher-level replication. These data indicate that the effect of
secondary substitutions on restoring viral infectivity and/or increasing
resistance varies with signature mutations and INSTI.

In this resistance selection study, the lowest starting dose of 6.4 nM
DTG was less than the EC ~90~ (8.4 nM) but higher than the EC ~50~ (2.1
nM) to wild-type NL432 in MT-2 cells under our standard conditions
(Shionogi Research Laboratories, unpublished data). It is important to
note that the *in vitro* resistance selection condition was optimized,
in that resistant mutants were able to replicate continuously, while
under those conditions, wild-type virus or inoculated mutants need to be
replicated to some extent, because a genetically mutated virus at the
reverse transcription step is not yet phenotypically drug resistant.
Eventually, the newly replicated resistant virus is phenotypically drug
resistant and will overcome the wild-type virus under drug pressure.
Nevertheless, the addition of secondary substitutions to mutants with
the E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, or N155H substitution was not observed in
DTG-containing culture. This suggests that the secondary substitutions
added to these primary mutations would be unable to increase the FC to
DTG sufficiently to allow replication with ≥6.4 nM DTG under the
NL432/MT-2 selection conditions. This is consistent with our previous
data regarding DTG FCs to multiple SDMs ( 20 ). Although susceptible to
DTG, secondary substitutions were observed in the Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R
mutants. In the present study, drug concentrations were increased
stepwise by 5-fold when a CPE indicating viral replication was observed.
As shown in Table 1 and Fig. 1a , the E138K/Q148R, G140S/Q148R, and
G140S/Q148H secondary substitutions emerged at 6.4 nM DTG, which is
3-fold higher than the EC ~50~ ; the FCs of these mutants were 4.0, 8.4,
and 2.6, respectively. Therefore, these mutants should have replicated
at 6.4 nM DTG, and then double or multiple substitutions should have
emerged subsequently. However, Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R mutants exposed to
32 nM DTG (approximately 15 times higher than the EC ~50~ and 4 times
higher than the EC ~90~ ) resulted in the complete suppression of viral
replication. The FC value of the E138K/Q148K mutant was 19 but displayed
reduced replication in ≥32 nM DTG. In contrast, single mutations that
emerged upon exposure to RAL or EVG were associated with high
resistance.

We included *in vitro* selection studies with the wild-type HIV-1 NL432
strain with DTG, and amino acid substitutions in the IN region, E92Q and
G193E, were observed. Although the FC values did not significantly
change and viral replication was inhibited by 32 nM DTG ( Table 2 ), we
supposed that viruses containing the E92Q or G193E substitution had
still a little more advantage over the wild-type under drug selection
pressure. E92Q is a well-established EVG resistance substitution ( 26 ,
27 ) *in vitro* and in clinical trials, and the FC value against EVG was
19 ( 20 ). However, the antiviral responses of DTG and RAL are similar
(FCs, 1.6 and 3.5, respectively). G193E is a polymorphic substitution in
the IN region that occurs in 2.3% of the 2,997 IN sequences available
prior to 2005 (Los Alamos Database and Stanford Resistance Database),
before RAL had progressed to clinical trials ( 28 ). *In vitro*
selection studies with HIV-1 clinical isolates of subtype B, C, or A/G
and DTG were reported previously, and amino acid substitutions in the IN
region, G118R and R263K, were observed, which confer low-level
resistance to INSTIs and are deficient in IN strand transfer activity (
29 , 30 ). We detected the emergence of R263K from the E92Q/N155H mutant
during EVG resistance selection. However, G118R and R263K had not been
detected during DTG exposure. One possible explanation might involve the
differences in passage conditions or in the genetic backgrounds of the
laboratory strains and clinical isolates. Importantly, the FC values of
DTG against all mutants isolated in *in vitro* selection studies of
wild-type HIV-1 were not significantly changed, and the selection
studies did not lead to the emergence of highly resistant viruses with
multiple substitutions.

On the basis of this and previous studies, DTG has been found to have a
high barrier to the development of resistance to wild-type HIV-1 and to
INSTI-resistant mutants with a single substitution, with the exception
of Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R. DTG was designed to maintain activity against
many INSTI-resistant mutants with single or multiple substitutions ( 20
, 31 -- 35 ), and this is consistent with biochemical and structural
observations ( 36 , 37 ). Studies showed that the dissociation half-life
of DTG from IN/substrate--DNA/INSTI triple complex in the presence of
the amino acid substitutions Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R and N155H
significantly reduced the dissociation half-life from that of wild-type
IN but was still similar to that of RAL to wild-type IN. This
observation may explain why there is no significant increase in the FC
observed with DTG to these mutant viruses. The INSTI-resistant double
mutants had a further reduced dissociation half-life to DTG, but it was
still longer than the dissociation half-lives of RAL and EVG to mutants
with a single amino acid substitution in the IN ( 37 ). *In vitro*
virology studies and the biochemical study suggest that the binding of
DTG to the IN-substrate-DNA complex is less affected by the IN active
site surrounding amino acid substitutions than by RAL and EVG. The HIV-1
IN/substrate--DNA/INSTI docking model suggested that the interaction of
DTG with the 3′-terminal two nucleotides of substrate DNA and strong
binding ability to the metal ions, along with the streamlined DTG
architecture, might be a likely explanation for the distinct resistance
profile of DTG ( 36 ).

Our data are consistent in various aspects with the results from the
VIKING-3 clinical trial ( 10 ) regarding treatment-experienced virologic
failure with either RAL or EVG. The DTG response rate can be categorized
into three types with the baseline IN genotypes. The first category was
non-Q148 mutants, which comprised N155H without a Q148 substitution,
having an 88% response, and Y143C, Y143H, or Y143R without a Q148
substitution, having a 75% response. The second category was Q148H or
Q148R plus 1 secondary INSTI resistance substitution, with a 59%
response, and the third category was Q148H or Q148R plus ≥2 INSTI
resistance substitutions, with a 24% response. In our *in vitro*
selection study starting from RAL- or EVG-resistant signature mutants,
the DTG resistance isolation pattern was clearly different between the
E92Q, N155H, Y143C, or Y143R group, and Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R mutants.
No addition of secondary substitutions to the E92Q, N155H, Y143C, or
Y143R group *in vitro* is consistent with the high response rate and low
virologic failure with additional mutations in the VIKING-3 subjects
with the baseline IN genotype of this group.

In VIKING-3, most of the subjects who failed RAL treatment and had the
Q148 substitution already had a G140 or E138 substitution at baseline.
This suggests that once Q148 substitutions are introduced, secondary
substitutions can be added quickly. In our *in vitro* studies, if the
start was from wild-type virus, non-Q148 mutants were isolated from DTG,
but if the start was from Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R, the addition of a
secondary substitution occurred within 14 days.

All of the mutations in patients with protocol-defined virologic failure
in the VIKING studies were detected in this study or had been identified
as having common secondary substitutions (i.e., T97A or E138K), and no
new secondary INSTI-resistant substitutions emerged ( 18 ). This study
suggests that additional substitutions leading to virologic failure
would be unlikely to emerge in patients infected with HIV-1 containing
the E92Q, Y143C, or N155H substitution. However, additional
substitutions previously observed during RAL or EVG therapy might emerge
from the Q148H, Q148K, or Q148R background.

In conclusion, the lack of selection under DTG in the presence of RAL or
EVG signature substitutions, except Q148 substitutions, is consistent
with a high barrier to resistance in these *in vitro* studies. This
finding is supported by the data showing that the secondary
substitutions into the E92Q, Y143C, Y143R, or N155H substitution were
not associated with a large enough increase in the FC to DTG. Increased
resistance to DTG in the Q148 pathway can occur via the E138K or G140S
secondary substitution, with subsequent T97A or V75I substitutions. DTG
might completely suppress the replication of those mutant viruses with a
starting concentration of \>32 nM *in vitro* .

::: section

