
#  Molecular diversity and polymerase gene genotypes of HIV-1 among treatment-naïve Cameroonian subjects with advanced disease

## Abstract

### Background
The progress of antiretroviral treatment roll-out programs in developing countries requires extensive monitoring of primary drug resistance prior to initiation of therapy. This is particularly relevant for Cameroon where a high HIV diversity has been reported.

### Objectives

To determine HIV diversity in Yaoundé, Cameroon, in a cohort of HIV-infected subjects with advanced disease. To characterize HIV-1 mutations conferring primary drug resistance and to assess primary resistance patterns in the RNase H domain of the reverse transcriptase of these viruses.

### Study design

HIV-1 RNA was extracted from plasma of 59 HIV-1 infected, drug-naïve subjects with CD4 ^+^ T-cell counts < 200/μl. HIV-1 pol (PR, RT and RNase H) regions were sequenced for subtyping and for identifying drug resistance mutations in *pol* (PR, RT and RNase H).

### Results

A complex HIV-1 diversity was seen, with multiple subtypes (A1, A2, C, D, F2, H, group O), CRFs (02_AG, 09_cpx, 11_cpx, 13_cpx, 22_01A1, 30_0206, 43_02G) and URFs. Primary drug resistance was low in PR (2%) and in RT regions (4%). RNase H mutations Q509L and Q547K were found in non-CRF02_AG strains.

### Conclusions

A high HIV-1 diversity was already present in Cameroon in the early 90s, when the subjects were likely infected. Primary HIV-1 drug resistance was low. Occurrence of RNase H mutations with proven phenotypic effect on susceptibility to antiretrovirals encourages further assessment of their impact in treatment outcome in the context of complex HIV genetic diversity and in a subtype-specific fashion.


## 2. Objectives

In this study, we evaluated the prevalence of HIV-1 groups, subtypes and
prevalence of HIV-1 mutations conferring drug resistance in a cohort of
late-stage HIV-infected subjects prior to their enrollment in a
prospective ART study. We also assessed, for the first time,
drug-associated mutations in the RNase H (RNH) domain of viral reverse
transcriptase (RT) of treatment-naïve subjects in a setting of a high
viral diversity.

::: section

## 3. Study design

*Patients and samples* . Fifty-nine patients with confirmed HIV
infection and late-stage AIDS were recruited at the HIV/AIDS and
Dermatology Clinic of the University of Yaoundé Teaching Hospital
between 2002 and 2005. All patients were HIV-positive, ARV-naïve, had
CD4 counts below 200 and signed an informed consent to participate in
the study. Five milliliters of whole blood were collected from each
subject, centrifuged, frozen at −70 °C until viral subtyping and drug
resistance testing were done.

*RT-PCR and DNA sequencing* . Extraction of HIV-1 RNA was done as
previously described. 14 , 15 Complementary DNA synthesis and PCR
amplification of the HIV-1 *pol* region spanning the entire protease
(PR) gene and approximately two-thirds of the reverse transcriptase (RT)
gene (a 1152 bp fragment) were conducted in two steps with specific
nested primers. ^15^ Where this was not successful, PR and RT were
separately amplified according to previously established protocols; ^15^
in some cases only one of these fragments was obtained. The HIV-1 RNH
region, corresponding to the C-terminal Pol fragment, was amplified for
subtyping and analysis of nucleoside RT inhibitor-related mutations, as
previously described. ^16^ All PCR products were purified, and sequenced
using the Big Dye v.3.1 kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA) with
an automated ABI Prism ABI377 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems)
according to the manufacturer\'s specifications and using inner PCR
primers. Electropherograms were assembled with SeqMan (DNAStar, Madison,
USA) and manually edited.

*Virus subtyping and genotyping* . HIV-1 subtyping was performed
following sequence alignment (PR + RT, PR or RT) with reference
sequences of all HIV-1 subtypes available in Los Alamos database (
http://hiv-web.lanl.gov
) using BioEdit Sequence Alignment Editor. ^17^ Phylogenetic analyses
were carried out with neighbor-joining (NJ) and Kimura\'s two-parameter
model with MEGA 4.0 ^18^ and 1000 bootstrap replicates, using an
alignment length of 1085 bp. Sequences which did not group with any
subtype/CRF or with "outlier" behavior within clades, were further
analyzed with Simplot v. 3.5.1 to determine recombination patterns. ^19^
Selected, representative viral sequences placed within the
"CRF02_AG-like" clade (CM04-081, CM04-098 and CM05-105) were also
subjected to similarity plot analysis in Simplot to evidence their
complex origin. PR and RT sequences were further analyzed for drug
resistance mutations using the Stanford HIV Drug Resistance algorithm.
^20^ Mutations were identified according to the latest International
AIDS Society--USA consensus ^21^ and to the most recent WHO list of
surveillance drug resistance mutations. ^22^ RNH sequences of 29 strains
were genotyped for identifying recently described drug
exposure-associated mutations (K451R, D488E, I506L, Q547K and Q509L). 16
, 23 , 24 , 25

Sequences obtained in the study were submitted to the GenBank under
accession numbers GU366105--GU366190.

::: section

## 4. Results

### 4.1. Genetic complexity of HIV-1 strains in Cameroon

Viral RNA was isolated from 59 HIV-positive patients, and in most
strains (44; 75%) both PR and RT were sequenced, while PR was the only
region sequenced in 5 strains (8%) and RT in other 5. RNH sequences were
generated from 29 strains, and in 5 patients it accounted for the only
genomic fragment.

A high HIV genetic diversity of pure HIV-1 subtypes and CRFs was found:
31 CRF02_AG (51%), 5 CRF11_cpx (8%), 4 CRF22_01A1 (7%), 2 of each
CRF09_cpx and D (3%), and 1 of each CRF43_02G, CRF30_0206, CRF13_cpx,
A1, A2, C, F2, H and group O (2%). Five strains (10%) were assigned to
unique recombinant forms (URFs) derived from different combination of
subtypes.

Fig. 1 depicts an NJ tree grouping viral strains for which the largest
*pol* fragments (PR + RT) were available. The predominant clade, of
"CRF02_AG-like" strains, including intermingling clinical and reference
strains of subtype G, CRF36_cpx and CRF30_0206, was not strongly
supported (bootstrap \< 70%). Moreover, most URF strains were placed in
a sister clade respective to CRF02_AG strains, representing complex
recombinants comprising subtypes A1, A2 and G and their derivatives
CRF02_AG, CRF30_0206, CRF36_cpx and CRF22_01A1. Indeed, recombination
analyses of those strains further corroborated these findings (data not
shown). A similarity plot analysis of three "CRF02_AG-like"
representative strains revealed complex evolutionary histories ( Fig. 2
). Strain CM04-081 showed a higher homology to CRF36_cpx reference
strains throughout the analyzed fragment ( Fig. 2 A). CM04-098 showed
unclear homology to CRF02_AG and CRF36_cpx strains in the 5′ half of the
fragment, and to CRF30_0206 in the 3′ half ( Fig. 2 B). Finally,
CM05-105 showed intermingling regions of homology with CRF36_cpx and
CRF30_0206 ( Fig. 2 C). These results were good evidence of the
complexity of HIV-1 strains in Cameroon.

Some strains depicted in Fig. 1 (CM04-089, CM04-093 and CM04-095)
strongly grouped with reference strains of CRF22_01A1, a variant derived
of CRF01_AE and subtype A1. We did not find any CRF01_AE strains in our
survey despite recent descriptions of this HIV variant in Cameroon. 10 ,
11

### 4.2. Drug resistance mutations and primary resistance

In PR, a high prevalence of secondary drug resistance mutations was
found, characteristic of non-B subtypes (data not shown). Two strains
harbored primary mutations; CM04-043 carried mutations D30N and M46I,
while CM04-052 carried only M46I ( Table 1 ). Three strains showed
mutations of unknown significance to drug resistance at PR position 48,
G48R in CM04-049 and CM04-053, and G48E in CM04-043. Finally, CM04-090
harbored a L33I mutation. In RT, one strain (CM04-089) showed a K219Q
mutation. Additional mutations at RT codons associated with drug
resistance were found in strains CM04-085 (V106I), CM05-103 (T69S) and
CM05-101 (K103R). All mutations were found in CRF02_AG strains except
for K103R, found in a CRF11_cpx virus. We did not find any additional
mutation of the WHO surveillance drug resistance mutation list. ^22^



In the RNase H domain, we found mutations Q509L and Q547K in one
CRF22_01A1 and in one group O strain, respectively ( Table 1 ). Other
mutations occurring at some of these sites were also observed, as was
the case of mutations Q509H (one CRF13_cpx and one URF) and Q509I (one
CRF11_cpx).


## 5. Discussion

In this study, an extensive genetic diversity of HIV-1 was found among
Cameroonians with advanced stages of infection. These findings suggested
that a high molecular HIV heterogeneity must have been already present
in Cameroon in the early to mid 1990s, in agreement with previous
reports. 26 , 27 The observed genetic forms and prevalence were
consistent with previous reports on molecular HIV diversity in this
country. 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , \[9\] , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13

Interestingly, a high genetic complexity of "CRF02_AG-like" strains was
found in our survey. Although a phylogenetic reconstruction showed a
"CRF02_AG-like" clade ( Fig. 1 ), it was weakly supported by low
bootstrap estimates and by the inclusion of several CRF02_AG-derived
CRFs, like CRF30_0206, ^28^ CRF36cpx ^29^ and CRF43_02G. ^30^ Analysis
of several, recently reported Cameroonian strains assigned to CRF02_AG
showed that they rather represented strains of the abovementioned
variants (data not shown). Similarly, we did not find any CRF01_AE
strain, although three of our strains strongly grouped with CRF22_01A1,
a CRF comprising fragments of CRF01_AE. More meticulous analyses of
Cameroonian HIV-1 strains should be conducted in further molecular
epidemiology studies for allowing a more precise appreciation of HIV-1
genetic diversity.

In our survey for primary drug resistance, we did not find mutations
conferring resistance to non-nucleoside RT inhibitors (NNRTI),
reflecting lack of disseminated NNRTI usage in Cameroon at the time of
collection. Our primary drug resistance estimates were in agreement with
other recent surveys conducted in Cameroon, \[9\] , 31 , 32 except for
the higher NNRTI resistance estimates observed in these reports.

New drug-associated mutations have been recently described in the
C-terminal domains of HIV-1 RT, namely the connection and the RNH
domains. 16 , 23 , 24 , 25 While most studies have been conducted with
HIV-1 subtype B, we have reported, for the first time, the occurrence of
mutations in the RNH domain of drug-naïve viruses belonging to non-B
subtypes. Analysis of 29 RNH sequences showed Q509L in one CRF22_01A1
strain and Q547K in an HIV-1 group O strain. The Q509L mutation has been
shown to increase AZT resistance of TAM-containing viruses up to 50-fold
when combined with the connection mutation A371V. ^23^ It has been
suggested that Q509L increases AZT-monophosphate excision displayed by
resistant HIV-1 RT. ^33^ The Q547K mutation has also been associated
with thymidine analogue drug exposure. ^16^ Although its mechanism of
action has not been elucidated, Q547K lies within the RNH catalytic site
and may reduce RNH activity, a phenomenon associated with increased
resistance to thymidine analogues. 24 , 34 Analysis of the natural
occurrence of Q509L among drug-naïve CRF22_01A1 strain is not currently
feasible due to the scarce number of these variants in public databases.
However, a survey at the Stanford HIV Drug Resistance Database ^20^
conducted for the most common HIV-1 subtypes and CRF failed to show
significant prevalence (\<1%) of this mutation in any subtype. With
respect to Q509H, found in an URF and in a CRF13_cpx, the Stanford
database showed increased prevalence (13%) in CRF02_AG strains exposed
to RT inhibitors when compared to drug-naïve strains, which may indicate
that this mutation is also associated to transmitted drug resistance.
The possibility that Q509H represents a polymorphism in certain HIV-1
non-B subtypes, however, cannot be ruled out.

Our analysis revealed that 30 of 32 RNH sequences carried Q547K among
HIV-1 group O strains analyzed in the Los Alamos HIV Database. Although
detailed information on drug exposure of these strains was not
available, we presume that HIV-1 group O strains are likely carriers of
this polymorphism with a high frequency. It remains to be determined
whether such polymorphism has a phenotypic impact on drug susceptibility
to RT inhibitors, either *per se* or in combination with primary
resistance mutations.

In summary, we have shown a highly complex molecular diversity of HIV-1
strains in Cameroon in infected patients at an advanced stage of
disease. This complexity makes HIV subtyping a difficult task in this
geographic area, which should be conducted with caution. Moreover, we
showed that levels of HIV-1 primary drug resistance were low in these
patients. Finally, we were able to pinpoint newly described RNH
drug-associated mutations, setting the ground for defining primary
resistance in this RT C-terminal genomic region. Altogether, these data
contribute to a better understanding on the impact of HIV-1 genetic
diversity in primary resistance and in potential outcomes of ART in a
highly diverse, resource-limited setting.




