# Increased Virological Failure in Naive HIV-1--Infected Patients Taking Lamivudine Compared With Emtricitabine in Combination With Tenofovir and Efavirenz or Nevirapine in the Dutch Nationwide ATHENA Cohort


***Background.*** Guidelines for treatment of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection consider lamivudine and emtricitabine to
be interchangeable components in first-line combination antiretroviral
therapy (cART). The evidence for their clinical equivalence in cART is
inconsistent. The primary aim of this study was to evaluate the
virological responses to lamivudine and emtricitabine in recommended
cART.

***Methods.*** This was an observational study using data from the AIDS
Therapy Evaluation in the Netherlands (ATHENA) nationwide HIV cohort.
The virological responses to lamivudine and emtricitabine were compared
by multivariable adjusted logistic regression and Cox proportional
hazard models. Sensitivity analyses included propensity score--adjusted
models.

***Results.*** Therapy-naive HIV-1--infected patients without baseline
resistance (N = 4740) initiated lamivudine or emtricitabine with
efavirenz/tenofovir or nevirapine/tenofovir. The use of lamivudine was
associated with more virological failure at week 48 compared to
emtricitabine with efavirenz/tenofovir (10.8% vs 3.6%; adjusted odds
ratio \[AOR\], 1.78; 95% confidence interval \[CI\], 1.11--2.84) and
nevirapine/tenofovir (27% vs 11%; AOR, 2.09; 95% CI, 1.25--3.52) in
on-treatment analysis. Propensity score--adjusted models and
intent-to-treat sensitivity analyses gave comparable results. The
adjusted hazard ratio of virological failure at week 240 using
lamivudine instead of emtricitabine was 2.35 (95% CI, 1.61--3.42) with
efavirenz and 2.01 (95% CI, 1.36--2.98) with nevirapine. The inclusion
of lamivudine or emtricitabine in cART did not influence the time to
virological suppression within 48 weeks or the probability of
virological rebound after successful virological suppression.

***Conclusions.*** The use of emtricitabine instead of lamivudine as
part of cART was associated with better virological responses. These
findings are relevant for settings with extensive use of lamivudine and
for settings where generic lamivudine will be available.


## METHODS

### Data Source and Regulatory Approval

HIV-infected individuals in the Netherlands are registered in the
nationwide cohort maintained by the HIV Monitoring Foundation (Stichting
HIV Monitoring), known as the AIDS Therapy Evaluation in the Netherlands
(ATHENA) cohort. ATHENA has collected data of individuals in HIV care
since January 1996 from the 26 HIV treatment centers in the Netherlands
\[ 18 \]. HIV patients can opt out from the ATHENA cohort after being
informed by their treating physicians on the purpose of data collection.
The data collection in the ATHENA cohort is part of standard HIV care
and no ethical approval of institutional review boards is needed. The
study protocol was peer reviewed and is registered under Stichting HIV
Monitoring number I13018 (available at:
http://www.hiv-monitoring.nl/english/research/research-projects/ ).

### Study Population

By 31 December 2012, 21 012 HIV-infected individuals were registered in
the Netherlands; 20 676 (98.4%) patients consented to inclusion in the
ATHENA cohort and subsequent structured prospective data collection \[
19 \]. Recorded data included demographics, comorbidities, initial cART,
antiretroviral therapy (ART) switches, and clinical, immunological, and
virological parameters. The reasons for switching ART were registered by
the treating physicians and included, among other reasons, virological
failure and toxicity. For this study, we identified HIV-infected adults
from ATHENA who initiated lamivudine or emtricitabine in cART with
either efavirenz/tenofovir or nevirapine/tenofovir between 1 January
2002 and 31 January 2012. ART-experienced patients and patients with
baseline resistance (at least low level) according to the Stanford
Database to any component of cART were identified and excluded from the
analyses of outcomes.

### Study Outcomes

We used a clinical approach to evaluate 5 outcomes. First, virological
failure at week 48 after cART initiation was analyzed. Any HIV RNA ≥400
copies/mL within the 48 ± 10-week window defined virological failure.
Patients without any HIV RNA in this window were not included in the
analysis of this outcome. In addition, all cART discontinuations for
registered virological failures or for deaths while the last HIV RNA
level was ≥400 copies/mL prior to 48 ± 10 weeks were considered
virological failures. HIV RNA copies/mL ≥400 was considered a "viral
blip" if preceded and followed by HIV RNA \<400 copies/mL. Patients
without any HIV RNA levels recorded after cART initiation were
considered lost to follow-up. The second outcome was virological
suppression and was defined by the time from cART initiation to the
first of 2 consecutive HIV RNA levels \<400 copies/mL within 48 ± 10
weeks. Third, we analyzed the time to registered virological failure
within 240 weeks after the initiation of cART. The time to virological
failure was defined by the time from cART initiation to cART switches
for registered virological failure or death while HIV RNA was ≥400
copies/mL. Fourth, the time from cART initiation to virological failure
within 240 weeks was evaluated after achieving HIV RNA \<400 copies/mL
first on initial cART. These virological failures after an HIV RNA level
\<400 copies/mL were defined as rebounds. Last, the HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase sequences at cART initiation and failure were evaluated
and compared regarding mutations that resulted in at least low-level
resistance according to the Stanford Resistance Database \[ 20 \].

Data were collected on cART, previous ART, drug resistance, age at cART
initiation, sex, region of origin, HIV-1 transmission route, hepatitis B
/C virus coinfection (HBV/HCV), treatment hospital, last HIV RNA level
(continuous until ≥100 000), and CD4 count prior to initiation of cART.
The presence of HBV surface antigen, HCV RNA or, if unavailable, HCV
antibody defined HBV and HCV coinfection. Missing baseline HIV RNA (3.5%
of total) and CD4 counts (3.9%) were imputed and estimated by age, sex,
region of origin, transmission route, HCV, and cART initiation year.

### Statistical Analysis

Data were described as means, medians, or numbers with percentages.
Adjusted logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios
(ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) on virological failure at
week 48. These models included cART, HIV RNA, CD4 count, region of
origin, and all covariates with *P* \< .1 in unadjusted analysis of
virological failure as fixed effects. The treatment hospitals were
included as random covariate. The primary outcome was virological
failure at week 48 by on-treatment (OT) analysis. In this analysis,
patients with registered cART switches for other reasons than
virological failure or loss to follow-up were not considered failures.
The ratio of the patients with virological failure (numerator) and the
OT population (denominator) defined the virological failure rates.

Three sensitivity analyses were used to evaluate virological failure at
week 48. First, any HIV RNA \>50 copies/mL instead of ≥400 copies/mL
within 48 ± 10 weeks was defined as virological failure. Second, all
patients lost to follow-up and all patients who switched cART for other
reasons while HIV RNA was ≥400 copies/mL were considered virological
failures in modified intent-to-treat (ITT) analyses. Third, propensity
score--adjusted models were used to correct for selection bias \[ 21 \].
The probability of initiating lamivudine or emtricitabine was calculated
by all measured covariates in logistic regression models. The propensity
scores were included as covariates and inverse weights with cART in
logistic regression models to evaluate virological failure within 48
weeks.

Multivariable Cox regression models and Kaplan--Meier estimates were
used for the analysis of (1) time to virological suppression within 48
weeks, (2) time to a cART switch for virological failure within 240
weeks, and (3) time to a rebound within 240 weeks. Hazard ratios (HRs)
were adjusted for CD4 count and HIV RNA. Patients were censored at cART
switches, last HIV RNA, or the end of the study period at week 48 after
31 January 2012. The analyses were done using SPSS software version 21.0
and GraphPad Prism version 5.0.


## RESULTS

### Cohort Characteristics

A total of 4836 HIV-1--infected patients initiated lamivudine- or
emtricitabine-containing cART between 2002 and 2012. Baseline genotyping
was available in 2267 patients and 39 patients (1.7%) had at least
low-level resistance. Fifty-seven of 4836 patients (1.2%) were ART
experienced. The characteristics of the 4740 naive HIV-1--infected
patients are provided in Table 1 . The patients initiated
lamivudine/efavirenz/tenofovir (n = 535),
emtricitabine/efavirenz/tenofovir (n = 3343),
lamivudine/nevirapine/tenofovir (n = 193), or
emtricitabine/nevirapine/tenofovir (n = 669). The mean age in the cohort
was 40 years. Overall, patients on emtricitabine compared with
lamivudine were more frequently men (88.0% vs 76.4%) having sex with men
(69.2% vs 47.0%), from Western countries (70.0% vs 53.7%). The median
cART initiation year was 2004 for lamivudine and 2009 for emtricitabine
regimens. Patients on emtricitabine had higher median CD4 cell counts
(260 vs 184 cells/µL) and lower median HIV RNA (82 173 vs 100 000
copies/mL) than those on lamivudine.

### Virological Responses

At week 48, 100 of 4740 patients (2.1%) were lost to follow-up and 831
(17.5%) discontinued cART prior to 48 ± 10 weeks for other reasons than
virological failure, predominantly ART toxicity ( Supplementary Data ).
Three hundred sixty-nine patients (7.8%) without HIV RNA recorded in the
48 ± 10-week window were equally distributed among the 4 groups ( *P* =
.077). The majority of these patients had HIV RNA \<400 copies/mL
(96.2%) or \<50 copies/mL (80.5%) prior to this window. These patients
were not included in the OT population, which consisted of 3440
patients.

By week 48, 38 of 352 patients (10.8%) on lamivudine/efavirenz/tenofovir
had virological failure compared to 88 of 2437 patients (3.6%) on
emtricitabine/efavirenz/tenofovir (OR, 3.23; 95% CI, 2.17--4.81; *P* \<
.001). Most patients (n = 91, 72.2%) met the definition of virological
failure because of registered virological failure before the 48 ±
10-week window. Thirty-five patients were considered to have virological
failure because they died with HIV RNA ≥400 copies/mL (n = 9; median
baseline CD4 count, 90 cells/µL) or had HIV RNA ≥400 copies/mL in the 48
± 10-week window (n = 26), including 24 patients on emtricitabine.
Twenty-three of these 24 patients had HIV RNA \<50 copies/mL with
emtricitabine/efavirenz/tenofovir after this window. With
nevirapine/tenofovir, 43 of 159 patients on lamivudine (27.0%) and 54 of
492 patients on emtricitabine (11.0%) had virological failure (OR, 3.00;
95% CI, 1.92--4.72; *P* \< .001). Most patients were considered failures
because of registered virological failure (n = 83 \[85.6%\]). Fourteen
patients were considered failures because they died with HIV RNA ≥400
copies/mL (n = 7; median baseline CD4 count, 80 cells/µL) or had HIV RNA
≥400 copies/mL at 48 ± 10 weeks (n = 7), including 4 patients on
emtricitabine. These 4 patients on emtricitabine achieved HIV RNA \< 50
copies/mL on initial cART.

The multivariable adjusted ORs on virological failure for patients on
lamivudine compared to emtricitabine were 1.78 (95% CI, 1.11--2.84; *P*
= .016) with efavirenz/tenofovir and 2.09 (95% CI, 1.25--3.52; *P* =
.005) with nevirapine/tenofovir (Table 2 ). These ORs were adjusted for
CD4 count, HIV RNA, region of origin, and all other covariates
associated with virological failure in univariable analyses (
Supplementary Data ). Sensitivity analyses showed consistent virological
failure rates if HIV RNA \>50 copies/mL at the 48 ± 10-week window
defined virological failure (OT), in analyses by ITT and in propensity
score--adjusted models ( Supplementary Data ). Only 6 of 119 patients
with an HIV RNA level \>50 copies/mL but \<400 copies/mL at 48 ± 10
weeks had subsequent registered virological failure. Compared to
emtricitabine, the propensity score--adjusted OR (OT) for lamivudine
with efavirenz/tenofovir on virological failure was 1.89 (95% CI,
1.20--2.97; *P* = .006). The OR on virological failure for lamivudine
with nevirapine/tenofovir was 1.65 (95% CI, .99--2.77; *P* = .057).
Similar results were obtained by weighed propensity score models.

The time to virological suppression within 48 weeks was not
significantly influenced by including lamivudine or emtricitabine in
cART (Figure 1 *A* ); adjusted HRs were 1.04 (95% CI, .93--1.15; *P* =
.498) with efavirenz and 0.96 (95% CI, .79--1.17; *P* = .680) with
nevirapine. The HRs for virological failure at \<240 weeks were higher
on lamivudine vs emtricitabine with efavirenz (2.35; 95% CI, 1.61--3.42)
or nevirapine (2.01; 95% CI, 1.36--2.98; Figure 1 *B* ). However, if HIV
RNA \<400 copies/mL was achieved on initial cART, no significant
differences were observed in rebounds between lamivudine and
emtricitabine with efavirenz ( *P* = .090) or nevirapine ( *P* = .255;
Figure 1 *C* ). The Kaplan--Meier estimate of the percentage of patients
still on initial regimen after 240 weeks was 50%: an estimated 26% of
patients had switched because of toxicity, 5% because of virological
failure, and 19% for other reasons (Figure 2 ).


### Resistance-Associated Mutations

Acquired resistance to reverse transcriptase was evaluated in 267 of
4740 HIV-1--infected patients, including 234 patients with registered
virological failure within 240 weeks and 33 patients with HIV RNA ≥400
copies/mL at week 48. At failure, patients on lamivudine regimens had a
higher median HIV RNA level of 49 231 copies/mL compared with HIV RNA of
4230 copies/mL on emtricitabine regimens ( *P* \< .001). Sixty-four of
267 patients had HIV RNA \<1000 copies/mL and their genotyping results,
if available, were not used. Of these 64 patients, 57 patients (89.1%)
were on emtricitabine-containing regimens. Of 203 patients with HIV RNA
≥1000 copies/mL at virological failure, the HIV-1 genotyping results
were available for 123 patients. Baseline genotypes that did not show
resistance were available in 88 of 123 patients, and these patients were
used for analysis of acquired resistance. At least 1 low- or higher
level resistance mutation was found in 80 of 88 (90.9%) patients,
including 40 of 44 patients on lamivudine and 40 of 44 patients on
emtricitabine (Table 3 ). The proportion of resistance against both
NRTIs and NNRTIs was not different between lamivudine-containing (84.1%)
and emtricitabine-containing (84.1%) regimens nor was the prevalence of
the primary resistance mutations M184V/I and K65R.


## DISCUSSION

This study compared the virological responses to lamivudine with
emtricitabine as part of first-line cART with efavirenz/tenofovir or
nevirapine/tenofovir. The use of lamivudine in both regimens was
significantly associated with more virological failure within 48 and 240
weeks of cART. Patients on lamivudine-containing cART had higher HIV RNA
levels at virological failure. However, the time to virological
suppression and the probability of rebound after successful virological
suppression were comparable regardless of including lamivudine or
emtricitabine in initial cART.

This study is the largest to date to directly compare lamivudine with
emtricitabine in ART-naive patients and the first from a resource-rich
setting. In vitro observations of lamivudine\'s lower efficacy against
HIV-1 preceded a limited number of clinical studies on this subject to
date \[ 22 -- 24 \]. The high virological failure rate we observed in
patients on lamivudine/nevirapine/tenofovir is consistent with the
results of 2 prematurely terminated prospective trials. In these
studies, a 25%--30% virological failure rate was observed on this
regimen, although only 59 patients were included in both studies
combined \[ 25 , 26 \]. To our knowledge, only 3 studies compared
lamivudine with emtricitabine as part of otherwise identical cART for
ART-naive patients \[ 27 -- 29 \]. Their generalizibility to other HIV-1
populations, like ATHENA, remains questionable because these 3 studies
were all conducted in sub-Saharan populations of resource-limited
settings (South-Africa, Nigeria, Zambia). Only 2 were randomized
clinical trials, of which 1 included stavudine, an NRTI that should no
longer be used, in cART \[ 27 \]. The other study was a prospective
open-label randomized clinical trial on 332 predominantly female
Zambians that did not show a significant difference in virological
failure between lamivudine and emtricitabine with efavirenz/tenofovir.
However, the power to detect a clinically significant difference in
virological failure with the included number in this study is
problematic \[ 29 \]. The only randomized trial from a resource-rich
setting that directly compared lamivudine with emtricitabine was done in
already HIV RNA--suppressed patients \[ 30 \]. All other randomized
trials that included lamivudine or emtricitabine in the treatment arms
for ART-naive patients had other NRTI variations as well \[ 5 -- 10 , 15
, 16 \]. Given the limitations of the trials that have directly compared
lamivudine with emtricitabine, an adequately powered, double-blind
randomized clinical trial is needed and should directly compare
lamivudine with emtricitabine as part of currently recommended cART
regimens. In certain resource-limited settings, this often still
includes nevirapine.

Our study has several strengths. We used the data of an ongoing
nationwide cohort with a well-established infrastructure and data
collection. The diminished virological responses to lamivudine in this
large cohort were consistently found in all models and sensitivity
analyses. Our study methods support the intended clinical relevance of
the study. Virological failure was primarily analyzed by OT instead of
ITT analysis because we considered an ITT analysis a method that is too
conservative to evaluate drug effectiveness outside the context of a
clinical trial. Nonetheless, the included sensitivity analysis by ITT
showed comparable differences in virological failure. In our opinion,
the use of HIV RNA ≥400 copies/mL instead of lower thresholds to
evaluate virological failure improved the interpretation of the drugs\'
clinical effectiveness. Detectable HIV RNA 50--399 copies/mL could
represent other situations (eg, temporary incompliance) rather than true
virological failure. This is supported by the observation that the large
majority of patients with HIV RNA 50--399 copies/mL at week 48 do not
have virological failure in follow-up but resuppressed \<50 copies/mL on
initial regimens. Last, the decreased effectiveness with lamivudine
appears to be independent of the NNRTI background regimens; all patients
on efavirenz received once-daily cART regardless of lamivudine or
emtricitabine.

Several limitations should also be noticed. First, we realize that
treatment guidelines have changed during the study period, particularly
on CD4 counts at cART initiation \[ 31 \]. In the multivariable models,
we adjusted for CD4 counts and other observed differences in patient
characteristics. Second, the calendar year at the start of cART only
minimally overlapped between the lamivudine and emtricitabine groups and
as such could not be corrected for in the multivariable models. During
the studied time frame, differences between treatment centers or between
physicians may have influenced the results. Two factors make the
influence of these potential confounders less likely: HIV care in the
Netherlands is highly organized using internationally accepted
guidelines, and the treatment centers have been accounted for in the
models. Third, an observational study cannot correct for unmeasured
confounders or balance known and unknown baseline differences. These
factors can only be controlled for in a randomized trial. Furthermore,
no data on medication adherence were available and adherence could have
differed, as no single-tablet regimen exists that includes tenofovir and
lamivudine. However, the large majority of patients in our cohort did
not initiate emtricitabine with efavirenz/tenofovir as a single-tablet
regimen but started Truvada with efavirenz. Therefore, the pill count
differed by only 1 tablet (2 vs 3) in a once-daily regimen. As the
observed virological responses were consistent on efavirenz and
nevirapine, we do not consider adherence to be a major explanatory
factor of our observations. Finally, resistance data were available in
only 50% of patients at baseline and at the time of virological failure
and should be interpreted cautiously with respect to selection bias for
resistance testing at time of failure.

Our study could have important implications. The presumed clinical
equivalence of lamivudine and emtricitabine in treatment guidelines
could have a significant impact on HIV-1 care, as generic lamivudine has
become available. The observed increased virological failure rate on
recommended cART that includes generic lamivudine instead of
emtricitabine could result in additional morbidity and costs. Whether
these additional costs will exceed initial savings by using generic
lamivudine is unknown. From a public health perspective, in particular
in settings without routine HIV RNA monitoring, transmission of
resistant HIV-1 may be another consequence. On the other hand, as we
observed no difference in virological failure once HIV RNA was \<400
copies/mL, a switch to lamivudine once patients are virologically
suppressed on an emtricitabine-based regimen may be acceptable.

In conclusion, our findings add to the evidence that lamivudine and
emtricitabine may not be interchangeable in recommended first-line cART.
The use of emtricitabine was associated with better virological
responses compared with lamivudine. As the potential implications are
substantial, a randomized clinical trial is urgently needed.
