# HIV-1 recombinants with multiple parental strains in low-prevalence, remote regions of Cameroon: Evolutionary relics?

## Abstract

### Background

The HIV pandemic disseminated globally from Central West Africa, beginning in the second half of the twentieth century. To elucidate the virologic origins of the pandemic, a cross-sectional study was conducted of the genetic diversity of HIV-1 strains in villagers in 14 remote locations in Cameroon and in hospitalized and STI patients. DNA extracted from PBMC was PCR amplified from HIV(+) subjects. Partial pol amplicons (N = 164) and nearly full virus genomes (N = 78) were sequenced. Among the 3956 rural villagers studied, the prevalence of HIV infection was 4.9%; among the hospitalized and clinic patients, it was 8.6%.

### Results

Virus genotypes fell into two distinctive groups. A majority of the genotyped strains (109/164) were the circulating recombinant form (CRF) known to be endemic in West Africa and Central West Africa, CRF02_AG. The second most common genetic form (9/164) was the recently described CRF22_01A1, and the rest were a collection of 4 different subtypes (A2, D, F2, G) and 6 different CRFs (-01, -11, -13, -18, -25, -37). Remarkably, 10.4% of HIV-1 genomes detected (17/164) were heretofore undescribed unique recombinant forms (URF) present in only a single person. Nearly full genome sequencing was completed for 78 of the viruses of interest. HIV genetic diversity was commonplace in rural villages: 12 villages each had at least one newly detected URF, and 9 villages had two or more.

### Conclusions

These results show that while CRF02_AG dominated the HIV strains in the rural villages, the remainder of the viruses had tremendous genetic diversity. Between the trans-species transmission of SIV ~cpz~ and the dispersal of pandemic HIV-1, there was a time when we hypothesize that nascent HIV-1 was spreading, but only to a limited extent, recombining with other local HIV-1, creating a large variety of recombinants. When one of those recombinants began to spread widely (i.e. became epidemic), it was recognized as a subtype. We hypothesize that the viruses in these remote Cameroon villages may represent that pre-epidemic stage of viral evolution.




## Results

### Partial Pol Analysis

There were 164 HIV-1 strains characterized by partial *pol* sequencing
out of a possible 178. Most of the strains {126 (76.8%)} were collected
from 14 rural villages, where the prevalence of infection ranged from
1.9% to 7.5%, though there was one site with a prevalence of 16.3%. The
geographic location of the study sites, identified by 2-letter code, is
shown in Figure ​ Figure1. 1 . In addition to samples from the rural
villages, 26 strains from STI out-patients or general medicine
in-patients were characterized, among whom the prevalence of infection
was 8.6%. Finally, 12 strains were examined from discarded blood units
from the blood bank in Yaounde, the capital of Cameroon. No non-group M
strains were found.

Figure 1

**Satellite Map of Cameroon with study sites** . Study sites are
indicated by the two letter code identifying them.

Phylogenetic analysis of the partial *pol* sequences showed that the
majority (66.5%) clustered with CRF02_AG (Figure ​ (Figure2, 2 , panels
A/B). Bootstrap analysis of the clusters was performed after the
exclusion of URF, and significant bootstrap support (\>70%) was present
for the strains highlighted in the figure. The next most common genetic
form, present in 5.5% of the strains, was CRF22_01A1. This CRF is a
recombinant between sub-subtype A1 and CRF01_AE. Like CRF01_AE,
CRF22_A101 is sub-subtype A1 in the pol region of the genome, but each
of the CRFs (-01 and -22) form separate clusters within sub-subtype A1
that are distinct from each other, reflecting the different A1 strains
that were parental to the different CRFs (Figure ​ (Figure2A). 2A ). In
addition, there were 10 more genetic forms identified: subtypes D and G,
sub-subtypes A2 and F2 plus CRFs -01, -11, -13, -18, -25 and -37. About
ten percent of the strains, however, could only be described as a wide
variety of unique recombinant forms (URF). On the phylogenetic tree,
they are scattered throughout the tree, reflecting their varied
structure (Figure ​ (Figure2A). 2A ). In addition to the subtypes and CRF
listed already, these recombinants included those having regions from
subtypes C, H and CRF09_cpx as well as regions that were unclassifiable.

Figure 2

**Panel A: Phylogenetic analysis of 164 partial *pol* sequences from
Cameroon** . A neighbor-joining analysis of partial *pol* sequences
(protease and the amino terminus of RT) using the Kimura 2-parameter
method of distance calculation was performed with representative strains
of varying subtypes and CRF (identified by name). The scale bar
indicates genetic distance of 1%. Nodes with significant bootstrap
support (\>70%) and containing Cameroon sequences are indicated with
color. **Panel B** : **Relative proportions of different subtypes or
CRF** . RF = recombinant form.

The prevalence of the various genetic forms in the different rural sites
is displayed in Figure ​ Figure3, 3 , along with the overall prevalence
at the site. The prevalence in the rural villages ranged from 2% to 16%,
and the proportion of the strains that were URF ranged from 0% to 44%.
Two sites (ND and BA) had no URFs, while others had 3 or more different
ones (NG, LE, NJ and KO). There was no correlation, positive or
negative, between the prevalence of infection and the proportion that
were URF.

Figure 3

**Schematic showing the genetic types of viruses, based on partial *pol*
sequences, by geographic site** . Each virus type is represented as a
box, with the abbreviated name of the genetic form in the box. The two
letter code for the site and the prevalence at the site are on the left.
Letters = subtypes; numbers = CRFs.

### Nearly Full Genome Analysis

Full genome analysis of a subset of the CRF02_AG strains and most of the
non-CRF02_AG strains was performed. There were 78 full genomes completed
in all, and of these 23 were URF. The diversity of forms is tremendous,
even when the prevalence of infection is low (Figure ​ (Figure4). 4 ).
Diagrams of the subtype structure of the 23 URF that were sequenced in
full for this study show that more than 10 different subtypes or CRF are
included in the strains, plus regions that are impossible to classify
(Figure ​ (Figure4). 4 ). Presumably some of those regions are either new
subtypes or CRF that have not yet been identified. One of the most
striking of the sites is Lomie, where the prevalence is 4.6% but there
were 3 different unrelated URF containing 7 different parental strains
between the 3 of them; even a passing glance can detect the lack of
relatedness between the different URF from that site. At only one site
(NG) were there two complex URFs with the same structure, suggesting
transmission linkage. Demographic information suggested that they were
married, over 50 years of age, and self-described as monogamous.

Figure 4

**Genetic structure of nearly full length unique recombinant genomes by
site** .

Significant hypermutation was observed in 14.1% of the full genomes, and
another 16.7% were otherwise defective. Most of the hypermutated strains
were classified using Hypermut http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/ \[ 14 \], but a
few were only partially hypermutated and were discovered by the
characteristic G-to-A mutations. From the context of the hypermutations,
APOBEC3G is the likely enzyme responsible. In one case, a hypermutated
strain also had a 36 aa deletion in the *vif* gene, suggesting that, for
that individual, APOBEC3G was unimpeded by *vif* . A little over half of
the hypermutated strains were URF (6/11, 54.5%), while the rest were
both CRF02_AG and the other genetic forms; the URFs, therefore, had a
higher rate of hypermutation than the subtypes or CRFs. In addition to
11 hypermutated strains, there were 13 strains with major defects likely
to make them functionally dead. Most were frame shift mutations leading
to stop codons, but there were 3 strains that had large
insertions/duplications in the *nef* gene. The sizes of the insertions
or duplications were 17 aa, 40 aa and 75 aa, respectively. Defective
genomes were not more prevalent in URFs than other genetic forms.



## Discussion

While genetic diversity in Cameroon has been described frequently in the
literature, this report documents the high degree of genetic diversity
using nearly full genome sequencing of samples from very rural sites in
Cameroon. The prevalence of infection was relatively low by African
standards (4.9%), and CRF02_AG was the predominant strain (66.5%), but
about a third of the remaining HIV-1 genotypes detected (57/164) were
confined to only one or at most a few persons. As others have shown,
Central West Africa is the most likely geographical location for the
origin for the HIV-1 pandemic \[ 1 - 3 \]. However, counter-intuitively,
the prevalence of infection there is lower than the newer epidemics to
the east, west and south \[ 15 \]. We hypothesize that the low
prevalence is a reflection of lower transmissibility of HIV in these
populations. Even in villages with a large number of unique recombinant
forms (URF) such as LE, recombinants not only varied in structure but
also in the parental strains involved. Only in one village were there 2
URFs with identical structures, probably sex linked; and the two major
parental strains for that recombinant (CRF09_cpx, subtype H) were not
even found in the population. Viral loads for these samples revealed no
correlation between genetic form (CRF02_AG vs URF, for example) and
level of circulating virus (data not shown), but there was a distinct
lack of genetically related transmission pairs among the URF from the
same village.

A low rate of transmissibility may explain the low prevalence, but it is
very difficult to then account for the presence of recombinants with 4
or 5 different subtypes in one strain. Inter-subtype recombinants are
generally the result of super-infection with different subtypes and are
most commonly seen in populations with heavy exposure to multiple
subtypes \[ 16 , 17 \]. There are multiple subtypes in this population,
but at a fairly low level. The hospitalized patients and STD clinic
attendees would be expected to have the most risk, and the prevalence of
infection among them was significantly elevated compared to the rural
villages, but the rate of URFs among them was even lower than in
subjects from the rural sites. Recent research among subjects in the
capital, Yaounde, found that 16% of the subjects were dually infected
with either 2 different subtypes or different strains from one subtype
\[ 9 \]. As with the subjects in this study, they were low risk. Further
study in these populations is needed in order to discover what the
mechanism behind this observation might be.

A theoretical model to display one hypothesis is shown in Figure ​
Figure5, 5 , an adaptation from Kalish et al., 2004 \[ 18 \]. What is
known about the origins of HIV put the date of transmission from
chimpanzee to human between 1884-1924, the center of the figure \[ 19
\]. We hypothesize that the original transmission was probably
suboptimal in terms of replication in the human host and that the virus
recombined extensively in its \'search\' for the right combination of
genetic factors. In the figure, this period of time is represented by
multiple wavy lines. By 1960 in Kinshasa, there were two identifiable
subtypes, or variants capable of epidemic spread, subtype A and subtype
B/D \[ 19 , 20 \]. They were designated as \'pure\' subtypes because
they were epidemically successful, even though they undoubtedly emerged
from a long process of repeated recombination. In most countries in the
world, subtypes have been introduced, and in some cases these have
recombined to make circulating recombinant forms that are clearly
descendants of those subtypes. The situation in Central West Africa is
dramatically different from that picture, and we hypothesize that the
reason for this is that the viruses still in circulation in rural areas
of Cameroon resemble the pre-epidemic viruses, and that they are, in a
sense, evolutionary relics.

Figure 5

**Diagram of a hypothesized scenario of HIV emergence** . Different
colors represent different strains of the virus. Distance from the
center of the circle represents time since the initial emergence.
Adapted from Kalish et al., 2004 \[ 18 \].



## Conclusions

The genetic complexity of HIV strains from rural Cameroon defies both
logic and experience. Multiply recombinant viruses are found in subjects
who have a high risk of superinfection with different strains of HIV,
such as commercial sex workers or injecting drug users. The village
populations in this study, on the contrary, have a low risk of infection
as captured by the prevalence, but harbor viruses having 3 or 4
different parental strains. Among the 78 viruses sequenced in full,
there were at least 13 different subtypes, sub-subtypes or CRF
represented. It is hypothesized that that this diversity may be due to
remnants of the viruses predating the epidemic in 1960.



## Methods

### Subjects

Of the 17 village sites in Cameroon that were selected for this study,
14 were used for the genetic analysis, shown in Figure ​ Figure1. 1 . In
a study approved by the IRB of Johns Hopkins University, participants
were healthy adults who gave consent to participate, most of them
subsistence farmers and hunters \[ 21 \]. In addition, in-patients at
two district hospitals (Ndikinimeki, Lomie) and outpatients at STI
clinics in those same locations were enrolled in the study. Finally,
HIV-positive blood was collected from the central blood bank in Yaounde,
Cameroon, to monitor genotypes among blood donors. Blood was drawn and
plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were separated
using CPT blood collection tubes (BD, Inc, Franklin City, NJ). The
plasma was tested for HIV antibodies by Ortho HIV-1/HIV-2 Antibody
capture ELISA (Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, Rochester, NY) and reactive
samples were confirmed by two Western Blots (HIV Blot 2.2, Genelabs
Diagnostics, Singapore and Calypte, Cambridge Biotech, Cambridge, MA).
Those confirmed positive on both were used for viral load determination
and DNA extraction. Viral load was measured using the Roche Amplicor
HIV-1 monitor test, v. 1.5 (Roche Molecular Systems, Branchburg, NJ).
High molecular weight DNA was extracted from the PBMC using QIAmp DNA
extraction kits (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).

### PCR Amplification

The DNA from PBMC was amplified by nested PCR in the *pol* gene
producing a 1.1 kb fragment spanning protease and part of the reverse
transcriptase (RT) gene \[ 22 \]. The first and second round reactions
were conducted using 8 ml dNTP (1.25 mM), 5 ml 10× buffer (no MgCl ~2~
), 4 ml MgCl ~2~ (25 mM), 0.5 ml of each primer (20 mM), 0.5 ml Ampli
Taq gold (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), water and template in 50
ml total reaction volume. First round cycling conditions were: 95°C, 10
min, then 45 cycles of 94°C 30 seconds, 55°C 30 seconds, 72°C 1.5
minutes, then 72°C 7 minutes. The first round primers were: Pro5F
(5\'-AGAAATTGCAGGGCCCCTAGGAA) and RT3474R (5\'-GAATCTCTCTGTTTTCTGCCAG).
The second round reaction was with Pro3F (5\'-AGANCAGAGCCAACAGCCCCACCA
and ProRT (5\'-TTTCCCCACTAACTTCTGTATGTCATTGACA). The cycling conditions
were the same except that the annealing temperature was 58°C and there
were only 30 cycles.

Virtually full-length genomes of HIV-1 were amplified from selected
strains based on the results of partial *pol* sequencing. Limiting
template dilution into the first round was performed to decrease the
complexity of the sample and allow for direct sequencing of the second
round PCR product. The virtually full-length genome was amplified using
MSF12b (5\'-AAATCTCTAGCAGTGGCGCCCGAACAG) and OFMR1
(5\'-TGAGGGATCTCTAGTTACCAGAGTC), followed by F2nst
(5\'-GCGGAGGCTAGAAGGAGAGAGATGG) and ofm19
(5\'-GCACTCAAGGCAAGCTTTATTGAGGCTTA). PCR was performed as described \[
23 , 24 \], using the Expand Long Template kit (Boehringer-Mannheim) and
a hot-start method with a melting wax barrier (Dynawax). Cycling
conditions were: 94° for 2 min, then 10 cycles of 94°C for 10 s, 60°C
for 30 s and 68°C for 8 min. This was followed by 20 cycles where the
annealing temperature was 55°C. The final extension step was 68°C for 10
min. Multiple second round PCR amplifications were combined to provide
sufficient template for sequencing.

### DNA sequencing

Template DNA for automated sequencing was prepared as described
previously \[ 23 \]. PCR amplification products of the *pol* gene and
the nearly full-length strains were fully sequenced on both strands by
using fluorescent dye terminators and an Applied BioSystems (Applied
Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA) Model 3100 DNA sequencer. DNA
sequences were assembled using Sequencher software (Genecodes Inc., Ann
Arbor MI) on Macintosh computers. All sequences had at least 2 clear
readings in each direction for completion.

### Analysis

A multiple alignment of the Cameroon sequences with selected HIV-1
reference sequences was constructed using MacGDE 1.9.5, software based
on Genetic Data Environment (GDE) adapted for Mac OS X \[ 25 , 26 \].
Gaps that were introduced to create the alignment were eliminated in the
final analysis. Reference isolates from the different subtypes and
circulating recombinant forms from the pandemic, described in the
National HIV Database at Los Alamos, NM, were used to classify the
Cameroon sequences http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/ . Phylogenetic trees were
constructed using the neighbor-joining method and the consistency of
branching order was evaluated using bootstrap analysis by MEGA3 software
\[ 27 \]. Genetic relationships can be obscured by the presence of
recombinant or novel forms in the analysis of HIV-1 strains. To address
this, phylogenetic trees were constructed that included only a few
aberrant viral sequences at a time. Hypermutated sequences were
identified using Hypermut 2.0 software from the National HIV Database
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/ and were deleted from appropriate analyses \[
14 \].

Recombinant analysis was done with bootscanning \[ 28 \] and distance
scanning \[ 23 \] using SimPlot software, version 3.5\[ 29 \]. The
nucleotide positions of recombinant breakpoints were designated relative
to HXB-2 (GenBank Accession No: K03455 ). The significance of the
breakpoint assignment was assessed by the bootstrap value of the
relevant node in the phylogenetic tree, which was \>70% for
significance.

### Nucleotide Sequences

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers of the *pol* gene sequences from
Cameroon are available under GenBank Accession No. AY847362 - AY847453 .
The nearly full length genomic sequences are available under GenBank
Accession numbers AY371121 - AY371170 , GQ229529 and GU201494 - GU201517
.

