Sequencing and Phylogenetic Analysis of Near Full-Length HIV-1 Subtypes
A, B, G and Unique Recombinant AC and AD Viral Strains Identified in
South Africa - PMC

Back to Top

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here\'s how you know

Log in

Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation

**Preview improvements coming to the PMC website in October 2024. Learn
More or Try it out now .**

Search PMC Full-Text Archive

Search in PMC

-   Advanced Search
-   User Guide

-

::: {role="main"}
-   Journal List
-   AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses
-   PMC4378615

As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in
an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the
contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.\
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer \| PMC Copyright Notice

AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2015 Apr 1; 31(4): 412--420.

doi: 10.1089/aid.2014.0230

PMCID: PMC4378615

PMID: 25492033


# Sequencing and Phylogenetic Analysis of Near Full-Length HIV-1 Subtypes A, B, G and Unique Recombinant AC and AD Viral Strains Identified in South Africa

Eduan Wilkinson , ^1,,^ ^2^ Vera Holzmayer , ^3^ Graeme B. Jacobs , ^1^
Tulio de Oliveira , ^2^ Catherine A. Brennan , ^3^ John Hackett, Jr. ,
^3^ Estrelita Janse van Rensburg , ^4^ and Susan Engelbrecht

^1,,^ ^5^

Author information Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer

Go to:


## Abstract

By the end of 2012, more than 6.1 million people were infected with
HIV-1 in South Africa. Subtype C was responsible for the majority of
these infections and more than 300 near full-length genomes (NFLGs) have
been published. Currently very few non-subtype C isolates have been
identified and characterized within the country, particularly full
genome non-C isolates. Seven patients from the Tygerberg Virology (TV)
cohort were previously identified as possible non-C subtypes and were
selected for further analyses. RNA was isolated from five individuals
(TV047, TV096, TV101, TV218, and TV546) and DNA from TV016 and TV1057.
The NFLGs of these samples were amplified in overlapping fragments and
sequenced. Online subtyping tools REGA version 3 and jpHMM were used to
screen for subtypes and recombinants. Maximum likelihood (ML)
phylogenetic analysis (phyML) was used to infer subtypes and SimPlot was
used to confirm possible intersubtype recombinants. We identified three
subtype B (TV016, TV047, and TV1057) isolates, one subtype A1 (TV096),
one subtype G (TV546), one unique AD (TV101), and one unique AC (TV218)
recombinant form. This is the first NFLG of subtype G that has been
described in South Africa. The subtype B sequences described also
increased the NFLG subtype B sequences in Africa from three to six.
There is a need for more NFLG sequences, as partial HIV-1 sequences may
underrepresent viral recombinant forms. It is also necessary to continue
monitoring the evolution and spread of HIV-1 in South Africa, because
understanding viral diversity may play an important role in HIV-1
prevention strategies.

Go to:


## Introduction

S outh Africa has the highest number of people infected with HIV-1
worldwide, estimated at 6.1 million in 2012. ^1^ A major feature of
HIV-1 is the extreme genetic diversity of the viral genome, which may
have an impact on viral diagnostics, transmission, disease progression,
and clinical management. ^2^ HIV consists of two types, HIV-1 and HIV-2,
and HIV-1 can be further divided into four groups: M (Major), O
(Outlier), N (Non-M, Non-N), and P. Group M is responsible for the
pandemic and can be divided into nine subtypes and subsubtypes, as well
as into recombinant forms, which can be divided into circulating
recombinant forms (CRFs) and unique recombinant forms (URFs). Currently,
there are more than 65 CRFs and numerous URFs identified in the Los
Alamos HIV Database \[ www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/index \]. The HIV-1
pandemic is not uniform, but complex and dynamic with different regional
distributions of subtypes and CRFs. Subtype C is the most prevalent form
in South Africa and accounts for nearly 50% of all HIV infections
worldwide. ^3\ ,\ 4^ It is essential to continuously monitor the
diversity and spread of HIV-1 worldwide as the pandemic matures.

A total of 309 full or near full-length unique HIV-1 genomes from South
Africa have been characterized in various studies, 296 (95.78 %) of
which are subtype C isolates. ^5--10^ Other South African near
full-length HIV-1 genomes include two subtype A1 isolates, ^8\ ,\ 11^
two subtype B isolates, ^8\ ,\ 11^ five subtype D isolates, ^12\ ,\ 13^
and four viral recombinant forms, which included three different URF_AC
recombinant forms and one complex URF. ^6\ ,\ 8\ ,\ 14^

We describe the near full-length genome (NFLG) sequencing and
phylogenetic analysis of seven additional South African viral strains,
including HIV-1 subtypes A, B, G, and two URFs.

Go to:


## Materials and Methods

### Ethics statement

This study was approved by the Health Research Ethics Committee (HREC)
of Stellenbosch University (IRB0005239) and all study participants
provided written informed consent for the collection of samples and
subsequent analyses.

### Patients and RNA/DNA isolation

Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) samples from the
Tygerberg Virology (TV) cohort were obtained between 1998 and 2004. The
TV cohort, which was previously described in Jacobs *et al* ., ^15^ is a
rich sample repository containing specimens from patients from wide and
diverse backgrounds based on race, socioeconomic status, and sexual
orientation. Viral genotyping was performed on the envelope region of
410 sequences ^15^ and the partial *gag* , *pol* , and *env* regions of
a further 10 sequences. ^11^ A total of 35 (8.53%) non-C isolates were
identified among the 410 samples from the TV cohort. Of these, seven
non-C strains were selected for further characterization based on the
availability and quantity of samples.

RNA was extracted from 1 ml of the plasma samples (TV047, TV096, TV101,
TV218, and TV546) using the QIAamp Ultrasense Virus kit.
High-molecular-weight DNA was extracted from cultured TV016 using the
Qiagen DNAeasy Blood and Tissue kit and from uncultured TV1057 using the
QIAmp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen, GmbH, Hilden, Germany). These two samples
were genotyped from proviral DNA due to the lack of plasma in the case
of TV016, the difficulty in amplifying from RNA in the case of TV1057,
and the fact that these two patients were on treatment at the time of
sampling.

### RT-PCR and sequencing of TV047, TV096, TV101, TV218, and TV546

Between four and six overlapping fragments spanning the genome of HIV-1
were amplified using a nested long-range reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. Reverse transcription was
performed with Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) for cDNA synthesis, as described previously. ^16^ Primer
sequences, not provided here, can be found in previous publications.
^17--19^ Primers p24-7, poli8R, JH38R, and 9131R-2 were used for cDNA
synthesis. For PCR amplification, primer combinations RE9737F/p24-7
(first round) and RE9745/MOp24-6 (nested PCR) were used to amplify a
1.2-kb fragment from the 5\' long terminal repeat (LTR) to *gag* p24.
Primer combinations VFgag8/LPpoli-2 and VFgag9/LPpoli-4 (nested PCR)
were used to amplify a 3.8-kb fragment spanning *gag* p24-- *pol* IN
from four specimens and VFgag8/ppr4b and VFgag9/ppr10 from specimen
TV218. Primer pairs 4274F-2 (5′ ACAGCAGTACAAATGGCAGTATTCATTC)/LP7728R
and 4277F-2 (5′ GCAGTACAAATGGCAGTATTCAT)/LP7725R were utilized to
amplify a 3.4-kb *pol* -- *env* region from TV096, TV101, and TV546.
Primer pairs ppf4/IDRps3R and ppf5B/LP7632R (5′ TATCCCATTGCAGCCAGGTCAT)
were used to amplify a 3.2-kb *pol* IN-- *env* IDR from TV218.

The region spanning *pol--env* in TV047 was amplified in two overlapping
fragments: *pol--env* V3 (2.3 kb) using primers ppf4b/V3vh2R (5′
AAAAATTCCCCTCCACA) and ppf5b/V3vh4R (5′ GTGCRTTACAATTTCYGGGTCC) and an
*env* V3- IDR fragment using primer pairs V3vh1F (5′
TAGGCCAGYAGTRTCAAC)/JH38R and V3vh3F (5′
GCAGTCTRGCAGAARAAGAGGTARTA)/IDRps3R. To complete coverage of the
*pol--env* region for TV047 and TV218, an additional *pol* -IN product
was amplified using primers and conditions as previously described. ^17^

A 1.6-kb *env* IDR-3\' LTR product was generated with the primer
combinations 7496F/9131R-2 and 7542F/9110R-2 from TV096 and TV218.
Primer pairs JH41/9131R-2 and env *-* 27F/9110R-2 amplified this region
from TV047 and TV101, and a combination of primers env-27F/9131R-2 and
7542F/9110R-2 was used for amplification from specimen TV546.

PCR amplifications were performed with Advantage-2 polymerase Mix
(Clontech, Palo Alto, CA) at cycling conditions described earlier. ^16^
PCR products were purified with the QIAquick PCR purification kit
(Qiagen Inc.) and both strands were sequenced directly using the ABI
Prism Big Dye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Reactions kit v. 1.0 (Applied
Biosystems) and the ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyser (Applied
Biosystems). Sequence data were assembled and edited using Sequencher
software Version 4.0.5 (Gene Code Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI). Positions
with sequence ambiguities were assigned the appropriate IUPAC
designations.

### PCR and sequencing of TV016 and TV1057

Four overlapping fragments, LTR-- *gag* (1.09 kb), *gag--pol* (3.89 kb),
*pol--env* (3.94 kb), and *env* --LTR (1.64 kb), were amplified using
GoTaq DNA polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI) as described previously.
^11^ Sequencing reactions were done with the ABI Prism BigDye Terminator
Cycle sequencing kit v. 1.0 and run on the ABI 3130xl automated DNA
sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Sequenced data were
assembled into contiguous fragments and edited in Sequencher Version 4.8
(Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI).

### Sequence quality analysis and preliminary subtyping using online tools

The HIV-1 sequence quality analysis tool was run before further analysis
( www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/QC/index.html ).

Sequences were then screened with online HIV-1 viral subtyping and
recombinant detection tools: jpHMM ( http://jphmm.gobics.de )
^20\ ,\ 21^ and REGA v. 3.0 (
http://dbpartners.stanford.edu:8080/RegaSubtyping/stanford-hiv/typingtool/
). ^22^

### SimPlot bootscan analyses

A multiple alignment was done with the HIV-1 reference subtypes (
www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/NEWALIGN/align.html ) and the new TV
sequences using Clustal W. ^23^ The alignment was edited in Se-Al v. 2.0
( http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/seal ) and then used for bootscan
analysis in SimPlot v. 3.5.1. All of the bootscans were performed with
the Kimura two-parameter nucleotide substitution, a window size of
400 bp, and a step size of 50 bp.

### Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree inference

We compiled a dataset that included the HIV-1 subtype reference dataset
from the Los Alamos Database, as well as randomly selected additional
sequences. Multiple sequence alignments were done with Clustal W. ^23^
Thereafter, all of the genes of HIV-1 \[with the exception of the long
terminal repeats (LTR) and the *nef* -coding region\] were concatenated
in Se-Al v 2.0 ( http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/seal ). Gene
fragments were excised and overlapping gene regions were deleted from
the structural genes ( *gag* , *pol* , and *env* ), while still
conserving the open reading frames. This concatenated alignment was
manually edited to obtain a codon alignment.

A modeltest was performed in jModelTest 1.0 using the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) method to estimate the best-fitting model of nucleotide
substitution. Maximum likelihood tree topology was inferred in phyML v.
3.0. ^24^ The maximum likelihood tree topology was inferred with the
GTR, an estimated Gamma shape parameter, and the subtree pruning and
regrafting (SPR) method of tree rearrangement. Branch support was
calculated with the implementation of bootstrap resampling totaling 100
bootstrap replicates.

### Phylogenetic analyses of possible recombinants, TV101 and TV218

Based on the breakpoints identified with online tools, ML tree
topologies were inferred for each of the recombinant fragments. Each
fragment was aligned with the HIV-1 subtype reference alignment in
Clustal W and edited in Se-Al v 2.0 as described before (
http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/seal ). ML tree topologies were
inferred for each of the recombinant fragment alignments in phyML v.
3.0, ^24^ with the HKY85 model of nucleotide substitution and an
estimated Gamma shape parameter and bootstrap resampling totaling 100
replicates.

The AC recombinant NFLG sequences described previously in South Africa (
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"AF411956\",\"term_id\":\"19526265\",\"term_text\":\"AF411956\"}}
AF411956 ,
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"GU201611\",\"term_id\":\"289064963\",\"term_text\":\"GU201611\"}}
GU201611 , and
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"DQ093606\",\"term_id\":\"68522143\",\"term_text\":\"DQ093606\"}}
DQ093606 ) were investigated with TV218, using jpHMM to determine if the
breakpoints were similar and if we had a possible new CRF.

Go to:


## Results

### Patient demographics

All available clinical and demographic data of the seven patients are
summarized in Table 1 . The mean viral load was 61,608 RNA copies/ml
(SD=71,246.257), while the mean CD4 ^+^ cell count was 548 cells/mm ^3^
(SD=1,139.721). The dates of sampling collection predate the
implementation of the public national HIV treatment campaign and thus
only two of the patients were receiving antiretroviral therapy at the
time of sampling.

###  Table  1.

Demographic and Clinical Data of the Seven HIV-1-Infected Patients

*Patient*

*Sample date*

*Sex, age, ethnicity* ^a^

*Mode of infection*

*Viral load (copies/ml blood)*

*CD4 cell count (cells/mm ^3^ blood)*

*ART*

*Origin*

TV016

04-1998

M, 39, MR

Heterosexual

No data

421

Yes

Western Cape

TV047

08-2000

M, 29, MR

Heterosexual

29,800

265

No

Western Cape

TV096

09-2000

F, 36, Af

Heterosexual

204,020

96

No

Western Cape

TV101

09-2000

F, 23, Af

Heterosexual

88,558

2000

No

South Africa

TV218

11-2000

F, 25, Af

Heterosexual

76,117

No data

No

KwaZulu-Natal

TV546

08-2001

F, 31, Af

Heterosexual

15,985

No data

No

Eastern Cape

TV1057

04-2002

M, 53, Ca

Homosexual

140,000

108

Yes

Western Cape

Open in a separate window

^a^ M, male; MR, mixed race; F, female; Af, African; Ca, caucasian

ART, antiretroviral treatment.

### Near full-length genomic sequences

Assembly of the overlapping amplification products TV47 (9,083
nucleotides), TV96 (9,058 nucleotides), TV101 (9,038 nucleotides), TV218
(9,039 nucleotides), and TV546 (9,104 nucleotides) resulted in
characterization of NFLG spanning from the 5\' U5 region through the 3\'
U3 region. Open reading frames (ORFs) were identified for *gag* , *pol*
, and *env* structural genes and for *vif* , *vpr* , *vpu* , *nef* ,
*tat* , and *rev* regulatory/accessory genes. TV016 (8,039 nucleotides)
and TV1057 (8,084 nucleotides) spanned from the beginning of the *gag*
to the end of the *env* region and excluded the *nef* ORF.

### Online subtyping and bootscan analyses

Preliminary subtyping was done using the online REGA version 3 and jpHMM
tools, summarized in Table 2 . These tools provide a quick, preliminary
analysis of the sequences before detailed manual phylogenetic inference.
Three isolates (TV016, TV047, and TV1057) were identified with high
confidence as HIV-1 subtype B. TV096 was identified as HIV-1 subtype A1
and TV546 as subtype G. The REGA and jpHMM tools identified two possible
recombinants, TV101 and TV218. SimPlot bootscan analysis identified
TV101 as an A1/D recombinant and TV218 as an A1/C recombinant. TV016,
TV047, and TV1057 were confirmed as HIV-1 subtype B with high similarity
scores using SimPlot and TV096 and TV546 as subtype A1 and subtype G,
respectively.

###  Table  2.

Subtyping of All Seven New South African HIV-1 Non-Subtype C Strains

*Sequence name*

*REGA 3.0*

*jpHMM*

*SimPlot*

*ML-tree*

*Subtype assigned*

*GenBank accession*

TV016

B

B/K

B

B

B

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948656\",\"term_id\":\"689681374\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948656\"}}
KJ948656

TV047

B

B

B

B

B

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948657\",\"term_id\":\"689681385\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948657\"}}
KJ948657

TV096

A1

A1

A1

A1

A1

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948658\",\"term_id\":\"689681394\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948658\"}}
KJ948658

TV101

A1/D

A1/D

A1/D

A1

URF A1/D

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948659\",\"term_id\":\"689681405\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948659\"}}
KJ948659

TV218

A1/C

A1/C

A1/C

C outlier

URF A1/C

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948661\",\"term_id\":\"689681435\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948661\"}}
KJ948661

TV546

G

G

G

G

G

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948662\",\"term_id\":\"689681452\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948662\"}}
KJ948662

TV1057

B

B

B

B

B

{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948660\",\"term_id\":\"689681422\",\"term_text\":\"KJ948660\"}}
KJ948660

Open in a separate window

ML, maximum likelihood; jpHMM, jumping profile hidden Markov model.

### ML phylogenetic tree inference

The ML tree is indicated in Fig. 1 . Three isolates, TV016, TV047, and
TV1057, clustered within HIV-1 subtype B with high bootstrap support.
TV546 clustered within HIV-1 subtype G with high support, while TV218
clustered as an outlier to the subtype C cluster. The remaining two
strains, TV096 and TV101, clustered within HIV-1 subtype A1 with high
support. Based on the phylogenetic inference it would seem that TV218,
as an outlier to the larger subtype C cluster, may represent a subtype C
viral recombinant form. TV101 clustered within the A1 clade but this can
possibly be explained by the small recombinant regions of subtype D that
are interspersed within the larger subtype A1 sequence.

**FIG. 1.**

Maximum likelihood (ML) tree inference of the near full-length genome
(NFLG) concatenated sequence alignment. The ML tree inferred in
phylogenetic analysis (phyML) contains the seven newly sequenced
Tygerberg Virology (TV) isolates, HIV-1 reference strains, and 13
previously characterized non-subtype C strains from South Africa. The
evolutionary distances were computed using the GTR model of nucleic acid
substitution with an estimated Gamma shape parameter. The genetic
distance is displaying in the scale bar at the *bottom* of the figure,
while the major different clades of HIV-1 Group M have been highlighted.
The sequence IDs of South African strains have been marked with the 7
newly genotyped isolates marked in *red* and the 13 previously genotyped
isolates marked in *blue* . Bootstrap support values for the internal
branches for each major clade are shown with an *asterisk* and indicate
support higher than 90%. Color images available online at
www.liebertpub.com/aid

### Phylogenetic analysis of TV101 and TV218 recombinants

TV101 and TV218 were further investigated and phylogenies were also
inferred from the recombinant breakpoints identified with online jpHMM,
REGA version 3, and bootscan analyses. Representations of the genome
mosaic of TV101 and TV218 are illustrated in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 ,
respectively. TV101 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype A1 and D with
six breakpoints and TV218 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype C and
A1 with four breakpoints. The breakpoints of all the other South African
AC sequences are illustrated in Fig. 4 .

**FIG. 2.**

Unique recombinant form of TV101. **(A)** Bootscan similarity plot
constructed in SimPlot v. 3.5.1 shows the recombinant profile of this
viral isolate. **(B)** Schematic diagram of A1 and D recombinant
segments of TV101. ML trees of TV101 fragments with complimentary
reference sequences were inferred in phyML with a total of 1,000
bootstrap replicates. The evolutionary distances were computed using the
GTR model of nucleic acid substitution with an estimated Gamma shape
parameter. Each *roman numeral* in the similarity plot at the *top*
corresponds to a phylogeny in the *bottom* part of the schematic. TV101
is marked in *red* in each of the seven different phylogenies, while
bootstrap support values for each of the clades in which the isolate
clusters are also shown in *red* . Color images available online at
www.liebertpub.com/aid

**FIG. 3.**

Unique recombinant form of TV218. **(A)** Bootscan similarity plot
constructed in SimPlot v. 3.5.1 shows the recombinant profile of this
viral isolate. **(B)** Schematic diagram of A1 and C recombinant
segments of TV218. Radiation maximum trees of TV218 fragments with
complimentary reference sequences were implemented in phyML with a total
of 1,000 bootstrap replicates. The evolutionary distances were computed
using the GTR model of nucleic acid substitution with an estimated Gamma
shape parameter. Each *roman numeral* in the similarity plot in the
*top* corresponds to a phylogeny in the *bottom* part of the schematic.
TV218 is marked in *red* in each of the four different phylogenies,
while bootstrap support values for each of the clades in which the
isolate clusters are also shown in *red* . Color images available online
at www.liebertpub.com/aid

**FIG. 4.**

jpHMM analysis of South African AC recombinants. **(A)** Indication of
the recombinant breakpoints based on HXB2 numbering. The *uncolored*
regions denote missing information due to the input fragment sequence
and the *gray* regions denote missing information due to uninformative
subtype models. **(B)** Posterior probabilities of the subtypes at each
sequence position (original sequence positions) calculated by jpHMM.
Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/aid

Go to:


## Discussion

Limited information is available for HIV-1 non-subtype C sequences in
South Africa and currently only 13 non-subtype C NFLG sequences are
listed in the LANL HIV database. In this study, seven new NFLG sequences
were characterized: three subtype Bs (TV016, TV047, and TV1057), one
subtype A1 (TV096), one subtype G (TV546), one unique AD (TV101), and
one unique AC (TV218) recombinant form. This is the first NFLG of
subtype G that has been characterized from South Africa. Only three
subtype B NFLGs have been described from Africa and with this article we
increase this number to six.

These NFLG subtype B sequences include virus strains isolated from both
heterosexual and homosexual individuals. All of these NFLGs identified
in the present study were characterized in HIV-1-infected South
Africans. Traditionally, subtype C has been the predominant viral form
of HIV-1 in South Africa and today the subtype still accounts for the
majority of infections (\>95.0%). However, in recent years we have seen
an increase in the number of non-C HIV-1 isolates characterized among
South African individuals (E. Wilkinson and G.B. Jacobs, unpublished
observations). It is of the utmost importance to continue to monitor the
genetic diversity of the HIV-1 epidemic within the country, as
increasing heterogeneity can potentially impact the design of an
effective vaccine, viral diagnostic assays, disease progression, and
treatment and may lead to the rise of more recombinant forms. There are
currently more than 65 CRFs identified in the Los Alamos Database and in
2011 they were responsible for at least 20% of HIV-1 infections
worldwide. ^3^

### HIV-1 subtype B in South Africa

Previously, only two subtype B NFLGs have been characterized from South
Africa ^8\ ,\ 11^ and another one from the African continent. ^25^ This
isolate from Gabon shows no close phylogenetic relationship with any of
the South African subtype B strains. Two of the subtype B strains (TV016
and TV047) were genotyped from patients who were heterosexually
infected, while the other remaining patient, TV1057, became infected via
homosexual contact in 1982. He is classified as a slow progressor and
was receiving antiretroviral therapy when the sample was taken. Two
different HIV epidemics have been described within South Africa: HIV-1
subtype B in homosexual men represented the early epidemic and accounted
for the majority of HIV infections during the 1980s ^26^ and HIV-1
subtype C in the heterosexual population caused a later (or second)
epidemic and is currently the most prevalent subtype. ^27^

Although TV1057 was sampled in 2001, the infection occurred in 1982,
providing an opportunity to analyze a subtype B strain that originated
from the time of the early epidemic in the country. This strain was most
closely related to GenBank accession number
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"EF363124\",\"term_id\":\"125661194\",\"term_text\":\"EF363124\"}}
EF363124 from the United States as identified through a BLAST search.
TV016 (infected heterosexually in 1989) and TV047 are characteristic of
an emerging subtype B epidemic occurring in the heterosexual population,
indicating a crossover of the two epidemics. ^15\ ,\ 28\ ,\ 29^ TV016
was most closely related to GenBank accession number
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"EF363124\",\"term_id\":\"125661194\",\"term_text\":\"EF363124\"}}
EF363124 and TV047 to GenBank accession number
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"AY835795\",\"term_id\":\"56713998\",\"term_text\":\"AY835795\"}}
AY835795 .

### HIV-1 subtype G in South Africa

TV546 is the first NFLG subtype G strain that has been characterized
within South Africa. The first full-length HIV-1 subtype G sequences
were described in 1998 originating from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. ^30^ The majority of HIV-1 subtype G isolates identified
originate from several West Central and East African countries. ^31--33^
Subtype G is also included in nosocomial epidemic outbreaks in the
former Soviet Union ^34^ and more recently has been linked to spread
among infected drug users in the Iberian peninsula. ^35\ ,\ 36^ There
has been one report of the detection of subtype G *gag* sequences in
South Africa that was generated from samples that were obtained from
migrant workers from Nigeria, Kenya, Zambia, and Angola. ^37^ Compared
to other subtypes, subtype G occurs infrequently and TV546 is only the
second report of this subtype in South Africa. The strain was detected
in a female patient residing in a rural area of the Eastern Cape
Province and was most closely related to isolate 944-5 from Cameroon (
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"FJ389366\",\"term_id\":\"226933758\",\"term_text\":\"FJ389366\"}}
FJ389366 ) as indicated by BLAST. This patient, who became infected via
heterosexual contact, had no history of travel outside of South Africa.

### HIV-1 subtype A1 in South Africa

TV096 is only the third NFLG of the subtype A1 isolate characterized
from South Africa. The first full-length HIV-1 subtype A1 isolate from
South Africa was characterized from a female patient of African descent,
^8^ while the second was characterized from an African male. ^11^ TV096
was sampled from a female patient of African descent in the late stages
of HIV infection, as characterized by World Health Organization (WHO)
criteria. Blast and phylogenetic inference indicated that TV096 was more
closely related to African HIV-1 subtype A1 isolates from Senegal and
Uganda. Phylogenetics of the previously characterized A1 sequences from
South Africa also showed a close genetic relationship with other HIV-1
subtype A1 isolates from the East African region.

### Unique recombinant forms in South Africa

Two unique recombinant forms were also identified in this study. TV101
is the second URF_AD described from South Africa and is most closely
related to
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"AF457082\",\"term_id\":\"22596493\",\"term_text\":\"AF457082\"}}
AF457082 from Kenya. The first URF_AD recombinant was characterized from
a South African individual who became infected via heterosexual contact
in Kenya. ^11^ These two URF_AD sequences share no recombinant
breakpoints. HIV-1 subtypes D and subtype A1 have been detected in South
Africa in the past. ^8\ ,\ 11\ ,\ 12^

In addition to the URF_AD, TV218, a URF_AC was also characterized in the
present study. This is the fourth URF composed of subtypes A and C that
has been identified in South Africa. Two A1/C recombinants, isolate
04ZAPS204B1 (GenBank accession
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"DQ093606\",\"term_id\":\"68522143\",\"term_text\":\"DQ093606\"}}
DQ093606 ) ^8^ and isolate BBCR06 (GenBank accession
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"GU201611\",\"term_id\":\"289064963\",\"term_text\":\"GU201611\"}}
GU201611 ), ^14^ and one A2/C recombinant, 98ZADu178 (GenBank accession
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"AF411965\",\"term_id\":\"24181487\",\"term_text\":\"AF411965\"}}
AF411965 ), ^6^ have already been described. TV218, 98ZADu178, and
04ZAPS204B1 were sampled in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal, while the other A1/C
isolate was sampled in the far northern part of South Africa. ^14^

TV218 revealed a close genetic similarity to a previously described A2C
subtype (
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"AF411965\",\"term_id\":\"24181487\",\"term_text\":\"AF411965\"}}
AF411965 , isolate 98ZADu178) from South Africa. ^6^ The 98ZADu178
sequence was derived from cultured cells from an asymptomatic sex worker
in Durban (sample date 1998), while TV218 was directly amplified and
sequenced from plasma obtained during 2000 from a 25-year-old female in
Durban. These two A1C sequences are 97% similar and share similar
breakpoints. The *vpr* , *tat* , and *rev* region of TV218 is subtype A1
with a high probability, whereas this region in 98ZADu178 is A1/A2 with
a low probability.

Go to:


## Conclusions

Phylogenetic inference of seven newly sequenced HIV-1 strains identified
subtypes A1, B, and G as well as URF_AC and URF_AD. There is a need for
more NFLG sequences because partial HIV-1 sequences may underrepresent
viral recombinant forms. It is necessary to continue monitoring the
evolution and spread of HIV-1 in South Africa and worldwide.
Understanding HIV-1 diversity in South Africa will play an important
role in HIV-1 prevention strategies.

Go to:


## Sequence Data

The sequences analyzed during the study have been deposited in GenBank
and are available under the following accession numbers:
{\"type\":\"entrez-nucleotide-range\",\"attrs\":{\"text\":\"KJ948656 to
KJ948662\",\"start_term\":\"KJ948656\",\"end_term\":\"KJ948662\",\"start_term_id\":\"689681374\",\"end_term_id\":\"689681452\"}}
KJ948656 to KJ948662 .

Go to:


## Acknowledgments

This study was funded by the Poliomyelitis Research Foundation (PRF),
the National Research Foundation (NRF), and the Medical Research Council
(MRC) of South Africa. This research project was funded by the South
African Medical Research Council (MRC) with funds from the National
Treasury under its Economic Competitiveness and Support Package. This
research and the publication thereof are the result of funding provided
by the Medical Research Council of South Africa in terms of the MRC\'s
Flagships Awards Project MRC-RFA-UFSP-01-2013/ UKZNHIVEPI.

Go to:


## Author Disclosure Statement

No competing financial interests exist.

Go to:


## Fig. 1

Fig. 1 . Three isolates, TV016, TV047, and TV1057, clustered within HIV-1 subtype B with high bootstrap support. TV546 clustered within HIV-1 subtype G with high support, while TV218 clustered as an outlier to the subtype C cluster. The remaining two strains, TV096 and TV101, clustered within HIV-1 subtype A1 with high support. Based on the phylogenetic inference it would seem that TV218, as an outlier to the larger subtype C cluster, may represent a subtype C viral recombinant form. TV101 clustered within the A1 clade but this can possibly be explained by the small recombinant regions of subtype D that are interspersed within the larger subtype A1 sequence.


## Fig. 2

Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 , respectively. TV101 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype A1 and D with six breakpoints and TV218 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype C and A1 with four breakpoints. The breakpoints of all the other South African AC sequences are illustrated in Fig. 4 .


## Fig. 3

Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 , respectively. TV101 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype A1 and D with six breakpoints and TV218 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype C and A1 with four breakpoints. The breakpoints of all the other South African AC sequences are illustrated in Fig. 4 .


## Fig. 4

Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 , respectively. TV101 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype A1 and D with six breakpoints and TV218 is a recombinant between HIV-1 subtype C and A1 with four breakpoints. The breakpoints of all the other South African AC sequences are illustrated in Fig. 4 .




## Table 1

**Table 1 not found**

## Table 2

**Table 2 not found**

## Any table 0

<table><thead><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Patient   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Sample date   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Sex, age, ethnicity    <sup>     a    </sup></th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Mode of infection   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Viral load (copies/ml blood)   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    CD4 cell count (cells/mm    <sup>     3    </sup>    blood)   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    ART   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Origin   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV016  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   04-1998  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M, 39, MR  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Heterosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No data  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   421  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Yes  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Western Cape  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV047  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   08-2000  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M, 29, MR  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Heterosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   29,800  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   265  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Western Cape  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV096  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   09-2000  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   F, 36, Af  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Heterosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   204,020  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   96  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Western Cape  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV101  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   09-2000  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   F, 23, Af  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Heterosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   88,558  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   2000  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   South Africa  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV218  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   11-2000  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   F, 25, Af  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Heterosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   76,117  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No data  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   KwaZulu-Natal  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV546  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   08-2001  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   F, 31, Af  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Heterosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   15,985  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No data  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   No  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Eastern Cape  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV1057  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   04-2002  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   M, 53, Ca  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Homosexual  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   140,000  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   108  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Yes  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   Western Cape  </td></tr></table>

## Any table 1

<table><thead><tr><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Sequence name   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    REGA 3.0   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    jpHMM   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    SimPlot   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    ML-tree   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    Subtype assigned   </th><th colspan="1" rowspan="1">    GenBank accession   </th></tr></thead><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV016  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B/K  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948656","term_id":"689681374","term_text":"KJ948656"}}   KJ948656  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV047  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948657","term_id":"689681385","term_text":"KJ948657"}}   KJ948657  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV096  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948658","term_id":"689681394","term_text":"KJ948658"}}   KJ948658  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV101  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1/D  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1/D  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1/D  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   URF A1/D  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948659","term_id":"689681405","term_text":"KJ948659"}}   KJ948659  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV218  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1/C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1/C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   A1/C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   C outlier  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   URF A1/C  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948661","term_id":"689681435","term_text":"KJ948661"}}   KJ948661  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV546  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   G  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   G  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   G  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   G  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   G  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948662","term_id":"689681452","term_text":"KJ948662"}}   KJ948662  </td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   TV1057  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   B  </td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">   {"type":"entrez-nucleotide","attrs":{"text":"KJ948660","term_id":"689681422","term_text":"KJ948660"}}   KJ948660  </td></tr></table>



