# Genotypes and Transmitted Drug Resistance among Treatment-Naive HIV-1-Infected Patients in a Northwestern Province, China: Trends from 2003 to 2013

Ke Zhao , ^\#^ ^1^ Wenzhen Kang , ^\#^ ^1^ Qingquan Liu , ^2^ Yuan Li ,
^1^ Qing Liu , ^1^ Wei Jiang , ^1^ Yan Zhuang , ^1^ Zisheng Guo , ^1^
Zhuoran Yu , ^1^ Xinhong Li , ^1^ Chunfu Wang , ^1^ Na Yao , ^1^ and
Yongtao Sun ^1\ ,^ ^\*^

Dimitrios Paraskevis, Editor

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer


## Associated Data

Data Availability Statement

:



## Abstract

### Background

Transmitted drug resistance (TDR) reduces the efficacy of initial
antiretroviral treatment and has become a public health concern. Little
information is available regarding the genetic diversity of HIV-1 and
the prevalence of TDR among treatment-naïve patients in a northwestern
province of China since the implementation of national free
antiretroviral therapy (ART).

### Methods

Blood samples from 372 HIV-1 treatment-naive patients were collected
between 2003 and 2013 in Shaanxi province. Viral RNA was extracted for
nested PCR, and phylogenetic reconstruction and recombination analyses
were performed to characterize patterns of the HIV-1 subtypes. Genotypic
drug resistance testing was performed using an in-house assay to
determine trends in the prevalence of HIV-1 transmitted drug resistance.

### Results

Multiple genotypes were identified among the patients in Shaanxi,
including B (25.0%), C (0.3%), G (0.3%), and CRF01_AE (39.2%), CRF07_BC
(32.7%), CRF08_BC (0.8%), CRF55_01B (1.1%), and URFs (0.6%). The
subtypes were associated with the transmission routes ( *χ ^2^*
= 77.113, *p\<0.01* ). In this study, a low baseline CD4 ^+^ T cell
count and a high viral load were found among CRF01_AE-infected patients
compared with patients who were infected with non-CRF01_AE ( *p* \<0.01)
through sexual transmission; however, the CRF01_AE subtype was not
associated with a low baseline CD4 ^+^ T cell count or a high viral load
in Chinese patients infected through blood transmission ( *p* = 0.249).
The overall TDR rate in this population was 4.4% between 2003 and 2013.
A univariate logistic regression model revealed that a low CD4 T cell
count (≤100 cells/µL) was associated with the development of
drug-resistant strains.

### Conclusion

Our work revealed diverse HIV-1 subtype distributions in Shaanxi
province. We identified a low and stable TDR time trend among ART-naive
patients. These findings enhance our understanding of HIV-1 genetic
diversity and provide some guidelines for the improvement and
implementation of a comprehensive public health strategy of HIV-1 TDR
prevention.



## Introduction

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has dramatically decreased
the morbidity and mortality caused by HIV-1. According to the 2013
UNAIDS report, an estimated 35.3 million (range, 32.2--38.8 million)
people were infected with HIV globally in 2012. The number of newly
acquired HIV infections was 2.3 million (range, 1.9--2.7 million),
showing a 33% decline in the number of new infections from 3.4
(3.1--3.7) million in 2001. The number of AIDS deaths is also declining,
with 1.6 (1.4--1.9) million deaths in 2012, down from 2.3 (2.1--2.6)
million deaths in 2005 \[1\] . Despite these achievements, HAART is not
able to eliminate infected cells, and plasma viremia generally rebounds
quickly after treatment is discontinued \[2\] -- \[3\] . A safe and
efficacious HIV-1 vaccine is essential for controlling the pandemic and
eradicating HIV-1 infection \[4\] . However, the vaccine development
attempts have been disappointing so far, and there is a lack of broad
and potent protective neutralizing antibodies \[5\] -- \[6\] . One of
the greatest challenges in vaccine design is the rapidly evolving
genetic diversity of HIV-1. As a result, monitoring the genetic
diversity of HIV-1 is very important for understanding the molecular
epidemiology and controlling the spread of the HIV-1 epidemic.

Different HIV-1 subtypes have distinct regional distribution patterns in
China. CRF08_BC was found to be dominant in Yunnan province, CRF01_AE
was dominant in Guangxi province, and subtype B (especially Thai-B) was
dominant in Henan province \[7\] . Shaanxi province is located in the
northwestern region of China, and it has a low prevalence of HIV-1
compared with the other provinces; However, the proportion of patients
infected via MSM has been increasing rapidly each year. The HIV/AIDS
epidemic has presented novel characteristics; However, comprehensive
analyses on the viral genotypes in Shaanxi remain markedly limited.

Drug-resistant HIV-1 strains could be transmitted from one individual to
another. Due to such transmitted drug resistance (TDR), a newly infected
patient might carry a drug-resistant virus even if he or she has not yet
used antiretroviral drugs. The expansion of antiretroviral treatment
programs have led to increasing concern about the development of TDR.
Available data revealed that between 10% and 17% of ART-naïve patients
in Europe, the United States, Japan, and Australia have drug resistance
to at least one antiretroviral drug \[8\] -- \[10\] . A previous survey
performed between 2004 and 2005 demonstrated that the rate of TDR was
relatively low (3.8%) in China compared with the rate in developed
countries \[11\] . However, the effect of TDR might be higher in
patients in China than in patients in developed countries because in
China, viral genotyping is typically unavailable, and transmitted
resistance is rarely detected. Insufficiently strong drugs would be less
effective in reducing the viral load, which could lead to the
development of multi-class drug resistance. In addition, fewer first- or
second-line treatment options are available for patients in China. Thus,
surveillance data about the prevalence of TDR based on a large
population over time are necessary to develop a rational public health
strategy. HIV-1 TDR data from China are increasingly available. For
example, a recent study revealed that the prevalence of TDR from 2007 to
2010 was 1.3% in Chengdu \[12\] , and an overall 4.9% TDR rate was found
among ART-naive MSM in 19 provinces/cities in 2012 \[13\] . However,
very few genetic studies have been performed on HIV-1 TDR in Shaanxi
province.

In the present study, to assess the prevalence of transmitted drug
resistance and identify the pattern of circulating subtypes among
HAART-naive patients, plasma specimens from 372 HIV-1 treatment-naive
patients were collected between 2003 and 2013. Viral RNA was extracted
for nested PCR, and phylogenetic reconstruction and recombination
analyses were performed to characterize the patterns of the HIV-1
subtypes. Genotypic drug resistance testing was conducted using an
in-house assay to determine trends in the prevalence of HIV-1
transmitted drug resistance among HIV-1 infected individuals in Shaanxi
province.



## Materials and Methods

### Study Subjects

A total of 372 newly diagnosed HIV-1-positive patients who visited the
infectious diseases clinic in Tangdu hospital from January 2003 to
December 2013 were enrolled in the study. The department of infectious
diseases in Tangdu hospital is the main HIV/AIDS clinic in Shaanxi
province. This clinic is responsible for HIV intervention and prevention
programs, and provides free ART with care in Shaanxi province. HIV-1
infection status was determined by an Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
(ELISA, Livzon, China) and confirmed by Western blot assay (HIV BLOT
2.2, MP Diagnostics, Singapore). Inclusion criteria for this study were
age 18--75 years, both genders, antiretroviral-naive, newly diagnosed
and willingness to sign informed consent. The main exclusion criteria
were pregnancy or breastfeeding, anticipated poor adherence.

### Ethics Statement

This study was reviewed and approved by the institutional review board
of the Fourth Military Medical University in Xi\'an, Shaanxi, China.
Written informed consent was obtained from every participant before
blood sample donation.

### Plasma HIV-1 RNA assay and CD4 ^+^ T-cell count

The HIV-1 viral load was determined using real-time
reverse-transcription and polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using a
Cobas TaqMan 48 HIV-1 test with the high pure system (COBAS TaqMan48,
Amplink version 3.2; Roche Molecular Systems, Branchburg, NJ), as
previously described \[14\] . CD4 ^+^ T cell counts were performed on a
FACS Calibur (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) using the TRITEST
three-color CD4/CD8/CD3 reagent and TRUCOUNT tubes (Becton Dickinson,
San Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer\'s instructions. The cells
were analyzed with a multiset automatic analysis software program.

### Amplification and sequencing of HIV-1 pol

The viral RNA was extracted from 140 µL of plasma with the QIAamp Viral
RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Reverse transcription and
first-round PCR were performed by one-step RT-PCR (Prime Script One Step
RT-PCR Kit, Takara, Dalian, China). The RT-PCR and sequencing primers
that were optimized based on previous reports \[15\] are shown in Table
1 . The thermal cycling consisted of 50°C for 30 min and 94°C for 5 min,
followed by 30 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 2
min. The final incubation was at 72°C for 10 min. The nested PCR was
performed in a 50-µL reaction mixture; the cycling conditions were 94°C
for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of PCR at 94°C for 30 s, 63°C for 30 s,
72°C for 2.5 min, and an extension at 72°C for 10 min. The PCR product
of 1315 bp in length contained a full-length protease (PR) gene of 99
amino acid codons and the first 299-codon segment of the reverse
transcriptase (RT) gene. The PCR products were purified using the
QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and sequenced
using an ABI 3730 autosequencer followed by editing with SeqScape
software v2.5 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).

### Table 1

**Primers used in the optimized in-house methods.**

Primer name

Sequence (5′-3′)

Location

Purpose

**MAW 26 ^a^**

*TTGGAAATGTGGAAAGGAAGGAC*

2028-2050

one-step RT-PCR

**RT21 ^a^**

*CTGTATTTCTGCTATTAAGTCTTTTGATGGG*

3539-3509

one-step RT-PCR

**PRO-1 ^a^**

*CAGAGCCAACAGCCCCACCA*

2147-2166

Second-round PCR

**RT20 ^a^**

*CTGCCAGTTCTAGCTCTGCTTC*

3462-3441

Second-round PCR

**MAW26-07BC ^b^**

*TGGAAATGTGGAAAAGAAGGAC*

2029-2050

one-step RT-PCR

**RT21-07BC ^b^**

*CTGTATTTCAGCTATCAAGTCTTTTGATGGG*

3539-3509

one-step RT-PCR

**PRO1-07BC ^b^**

*CAGAGCCAACAGCCCCACCA*

2147-2166

Second-round PCR

**RT20-07BC ^b^**

*CTGCCAATTCTAATTCTGCTTC*

3462-3441

Second-round PCR

**MAW26-01AE ^c^**

TGGAAATGTGGRAARGAAGGAC

2029-2050

one-step RT-PCR

**RT21-01AE ^c^**

GTAYTTCTGCYAYTAAGTCTTTTGATGGG

3537-3509

one-step RT-PCR

**PRO1-01AE ^c^**

CAGAGCCAWCAGCCCCACCA

2147-2166

Second-round PCR and Forward sequencing

**RT20-01AE ^c^**

CTGCCAAYTCTAATTCTGCTTC

3462-3441

Second-round PCR and Reverse sequencing

**S1**

*GGACCTACACCTGTCAAC*

2484-2501

Forward sequencing

**S2**

*GCTGGGTGTGGTATTCC*

2842-2826

Reverse sequencing

**S3**

*CCTAGTATAAACAATGAGACAC*

2946-2967

Forward sequencing

Open in a separate window

Primer c was preferred, Primer a or b was alternative.

### Sequence analysis

The sequence contig assembly was performed using the analysis software,
Sequencher 4.8b1 (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI). Transmitted
HIV-1 drug resistance was defined as one or more mutations from the
Surveillance Drug Resistance Mutations (SDRM) list recommended by the
World Health Organization \[16\] . The mutations were interpreted by the
Stanford HIVdb Program Genotypic Resistance Interpretation Algorithm (
http://sierra2.stanford.edu/sierra/servlet/JSierra ) to predict the
susceptibility of the viruses to antiretroviral drugs, and low level
resistance or greater was reported.

### HIV-1 Subtyping and Bootscanning analysis

The HIV-1 subtyping was performed by phylogenetic analyses of the pol
sequences. The ClustalW Multiple Alignment \[17\] and manual editing
were performed using BioEdit Sequence Alignment Editor (Ibis
Biosciences, Carlsbad, CA) with HIV-1 reference sequences from the Los
Alamos database ( http://www.hiv.lanl.gov ). The phylogenetic trees were
generated by the neighbor-joining method under the Kimura two-parameter
mode (1,000 replicates) with MEGA5.05 \[18\] .

To demonstrate possible intersubtype mosaicism, sequences that were not
grouped with any regular HIV-1 subtype were again amplified for entire
full-length gag-pol gene sequencing (790 bp-5221 bp on HXB2). Two sets
of primers designed for the determination of gag-pol (790 bp-3462 bp on
HXB2) and pol (2068 bp-5221 bp on HXB2) sequences are shown in Table 2 .
For the gag-pol gene amplification, the cycling conditions of one step
RT-PCR in a 25 µl reaction were 50°C for 30 min, 94°C for 5 min, 32
cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 52°C for 45 s, and 72°C for 5 min, followed by
an extension at 72°C for 10 min. The nested PCR in a 50-µl reaction had
the same conditions as above. For the pol amplification, the one Step
RT-PCR cycling conditions were 50°C for 30 min, 94°C for 2 min, followed
by 3 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 4 min, 32
cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 3 min 30 s, and the
final incubation was at 72°C for 10 min. The nested PCR cycling
conditions were 94°C for 2 min, followed by 3 cycles of 94°C for 30 s,
62°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 4 min, 32 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 62°C for
30 s, and 72°C for 3 min 30 s, and the final incubation was at 72°C for
10 min. The amplicons were directly sequenced using internal walking
primers. The sequences were analyzed using the Recombination
Identification Program (RIP, version 3.0; http://hiv-web.lanl.gov )
\[19\] , and the bootscanning analysis was performed using Simplot
(SimPlot version 3.5.1; S. Ray, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD;
http://sray.med.som.jhmi.edu/RaySoft/SimPlot/ ) \[20\] . The following
parameters were used: window: 200 bp, step: 20 bp, gapstrip: on,
replicates: 100, Kimura 2-parameter, T/t: 2.0, Neighbor-Joining.

### Table 2

**The List of primers used in Bootscanning analysis.**

Primer name

Sequence (5′-3′)

Location

Purpose

**PG3**

*AGGGACTTGAAAGCGAAAG*

648-666

one-step RT-PCR

**RT21**

*CTGTATTTCTGCTATTAAGTCTTTTGATGGG*

3539-3509

one-step RT-PCR

**gag-F2**

ATGGGTGCGAGAGCGTCARTATTAA

790-814

Second-round PCR

**RT20**

*CTGCCAGTTCTAGCTCTGCTTC*

3462-3441

Second-round PCR

**POL-1**

TGGAAATGTGGRAARGAAGGAC

2029-2050

one-step RT-PCR

**POL-2**

CCTGTCTGYAGRCCCCAATATGTT

5264-5241

one-step RT-PCR

**POL-3**

ACTGARAGACAGGCKAATTTTTTAGGGA

2068-2095

Second-round PCR

**POL-4**

CTCCTAKTGGGATRTGTACTTCYGARCTTA

5221-5192

Second-round PCR

Open in a separate window

### Statistical analysis

The statistical analysis was conducted using the SPSS 17.0 package (SPSS
Inc. Chicago, IL, USA). The figures were drawn using GraphPad Prism 5
(GraphPad Software, SanDiego CA) and Origin 7.5 (OriginLab Corporation,
Northampton, MA). The categorical variables were compared using the
chi-squared test or Fisher\'s exact test when appropriate, and two
independent samples nonparametric tests (Mann-Whitney U) were used to
compare the continuous data. A logistic regression analysis model was
used to identify the factors associated with drug resistance. The
factors with significant univariate *P* -values \<0.1 were selected for
inclusion in the multivariate model, which used a forward stepwise
method. All of the statistical tests were 2-tailed ( *P* \<0.05).

### Gene accession numbers

All of the sequences obtained in this study were submitted to GenBank
with accession numbers KJ401414 to KJ401768 , KJ 364641 and KJ364642 .



## Results

Three hundred seventy-two HIV-1 confirmatory samples were collected in
this study; all of the samples were successfully amplified. Eight
(2.15%, 8/372) PCR products could not be sequenced, resulting in a final
analysis of 364 samples from treatment-naive, HIV-1 positive individuals
in Shaanxi who newly diagnosed between 2003 and 2013. The baseline
characteristics of the study population were shown in Table 3: 83.5%
(304/364) of the patients were male, and the median age of the study
group was 34 (IQR: 27--42) years. The median nadir CD4 ^+^ T cell count
was 257 (IQR: 70--386) cells per microliter, and the median viral load
was 4.94 log10 (IQR: 4.03--5.56) copies/ml. Although an HIV viral load
of greater than 3 log copies/ml was traditionally presumed to be
necessary for genotypic resistance testing \[21\] , the samples with an
HIV viral load of 1.94--7.88 log10 copies/ml were successfully amplified
using optimizing primers. All of the patients were recruited within 6
months of diagnosis.

### Table 3

**The baseline characteristics of the study population.**

Total

364

Percentage

**Gender**

**Male**

304

83.5%

**Female**

60

16.5%

**Age**

≤25

75

20.7%

26--35

130

35.7%

36--45

93

25.5%

\>45

66

18.1%

**Transmission routes**

Heterosexual contact

104

28.6%

Homosexual contact

177

48.6%

Blood transmission

49

13.5%

Intravenous drug injection

14

3.8%

**Unknown**

20

5.5%

**CD4 ^+^ T Count(cells/ul)**

≤100

109

29.9%

101--200

44

12.1%

201--350

92

25.3%

351--500

69

19.0%

\>500

50

13.7%

**HIV viral load(copies/ml)**

364

≤1000

34

9.3%

1001--10000

54

14.8%

10001--100000

105

28.9%

100001--1000000

132

36.3%

\>1000000

39

10.7%

**Year of HIV diagnosis**

2003--2005

41

11.3%

2006--2008

36

9.9%

2009--2011

122

33.5%

2012--2013

165

45.3%

**HIV-1 subtype**

CRF01_AE

143

39.2%

CRF07_BC

119

32.7%

B

91

25.0%

CRF55_01B

4

1.1%

CRF08_BC

3

0.8%

URF(CRF01_AE/07_BC)

2

0.6%

C

1

0.3%

G

1

0.3%

Open in a separate window

URFs, unique recombinant forms; CRFs, circulating recombinant forms.

### HIV-1 Variants

Three hundred sixty-four HIV-1 pol gene sequences (1057 bp) were
subjected to subtype determination by phylogenetic tree analysis (
Figure 1 -- 3 ). One hundred forty-three (39.2%) CRF01_AE strains, one
hundred and nineteen (32.7%) CRF07_BC strains, 91 (25.0%) subtype B
strains, 3 (1.0%) CRF08_BC, 1 (0.27%) subtype G, and 1 (0.27%) subtype C
were identified. Six isolates (kang007a, kang190, kang253, kang019as,
kang140, and ztt0203) were not clustered with the basic reference
subtypes/CRFs. Bootscanning analysis revealed that isolates ztt0203,
kang007a, kang190, and kang253 were similar to a novel HIV-1 circulating
recombinant form CRF55_01B, which is composed of CRF01_AE and subtype B,
with four recombination breakpoints in the pol gene \[22\] .
Bootscanning analysis revealed that two other isolates (kang019as and
kang140) showed a recombinant CRF01_AE/07BC pol gene ( Figure 4 ).

Figure 1

**Phylogenetic tree analysis from ART-naïve patients diagnosed between
2003--2008.**

77 sequences of HIV-1 gag-pol (1057 bp) were used and each reference
sequence is labeled with the HIV-1 subtype, followed by country, year,
sampling name, and accession number. The trees were constructed by the
neighbor-joining method. Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000
analyses, and bootstrap probabilities greater than 70% are indicated at
the corresponding nodes of the tree. Open circle: homosexual contact,
solid circle: heterosexual contact, open square: blood transmission,
solid square: IDU, open triangle: unknown.

Figure 3

**Phylogenetic tree analysis from ART-naïve patients diagnosed between
2012--2013.**

165 sequences of HIV-1 gag-pol were used and The lengths were 1057 bp by
using HXB2 as the reference genomic. Each reference sequence is labeled
with the HIV-1 subtype, followed by country, year, sampling name, and
accession number. Isolates: kang007a, kang190, kang253, kang019as,
kang140 were not clustered with the basic reference subtypes/CRFs. The
trees were constructed by the neighbor-joining method. Bootstrap values
were calculated from 1,000 analyses, and bootstrap probabilities greater
than 70% are indicated at the corresponding nodes of the tree. Open
circle: homosexual contact, solid circle: heterosexual contact, open
square: blood transmission, solid square: IDU, open triangle: unknown.

Figure 4

**Bootscanning analysis of gag-pol sequences (4300 bp) using SimPlot
3.5.1.**

A, Bootscanning analysis of gag-pol sequences of kang 007a. B,
Bootscanning analysis of gag-pol sequences of kang 190. C, Bootscanning
analysis of gag-pol sequences of kang 253. D, Bootscanning analysis of
gag-pol sequences of ztt 0203. E. Bootscanning analysis of gag-pol
sequences of the representative CRF55_01B (CN.2011.GDDG318. JX574662 ).
F, Bootscanning analysis of gag-pol sequences of kang 019as. G,
Bootscanning analysis of gag-pol sequences of kang 140. H, The reference
sequences (subtype B, CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC) were shown and subtype C, J
was used as an outlier. Bootscanning analysis illustrated the
recombination structures for CRF55_01B and the newly identified URFs.
The closely related parental strains for the URFs were identified:
CRF01_AE and CRF07_BC. The condition used for C: Window: 200 bp, Step:
20 bp, GapStrip: on, Reps: 100, Kimura (2-parameter), T/t: 2.0.
Neighbor-joining.

Figure 2

**Phylogenetic tree analysis from ART-naïve patients diagnosed between
2009--2011.**

122 sequences of HIV-1 gag-pol were used and the lengths were 1057 bp by
using HXB2 as the reference genomic. Each reference sequence is labeled
with the HIV-1 subtype, followed by country, year, sampling name, and
accession number. Isolate ZTT0203 was not clustered with the basic
reference subtypes/CRFs. The trees were constructed by the
neighbor-joining method. Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000
analyses, and bootstrap probabilities greater than 70% are indicated at
the corresponding nodes of the tree. Open circle: homosexual contact,
solid circle: heterosexual contact, open square: blood transmission,
solid square: IDU, open triangle: unknown.

Over the past 10 years, the prevalence of the CRF01_AE subtype in
patients increased from 9.76% to 43.03%. A similar trend was observed
for subtype CRF07_BC infections, which accounted for 12.20% of all
infections in the period 2003-2005 and increased during the last decade,
reaching 41.21% in the years 2012--2013. During 2003--2005, subtype B
infections accounted for 73.17% of all infections, and this decreased to
11.52% from 2012 to 2013 ( Figure 5 ). Increasing HIV subtype diversity
was found. Novel recombinant forms: CRF55_01B and URFs, were identified
in the period 2012--2013.

Figure 5

**The proportion of various subtype of HIV-1 in Shaanxi province during
four time periods: 2003--2005; 2006--2008; 2009--2011; 2012--2013.**

### HIV-1 transmission routes

The major transmission routes in the 364 patients were homosexual
contact (48.6%) and heterosexual contact (28.6%), followed by blood
transmission (13.5%), injection drug use (3.8%), and unknown (5.5%).
Substantial changes in the transmission route occurred in the population
of HIV-1 infected patients over time in Shaanxi province. The most
important changes over the last decade were observed in the proportion
of men who have sex with men (MSM). Before 2006, HIV-1 was spread mainly
through blood and heterosexual contact transmission (56.10% and 29.27%,
respectively). Between 2006 and 2008, the proportions of HIV-1
transmission through blood and homosexual contact were 25.56% and
27.78%, respectively. From the beginning of 2009, homosexual
transmission of HIV displayed explosive growth and became the dominant
route of HIV-1 transmission, accounting for 52.46% of the spread. In
last time period (2012--13), homosexual transmission exceeded the other
routes of HIV-1 transmission and further increased to 66.67% of the
spread. The distribution of the routes of HIV-1 transmission in this
region is shown in Figure 6 . Subtypes were associated with the
transmission route ( *χ ^2^* = 77.113, *p\<0.01* ). IDU was the main
risk group for the spread of CRF07_BC (χ ^2^ = 116.42, *p* \<0.01).
Clade CRF01_AE was found significantly more frequently in homosexual
patients than in the other risk groups (χ ^2^ = 169.552, *P* \<0.01).
Subtype B was found significantly more frequently in blood transmission
patients than in the other risk groups (χ ^2^ = 31.247, *P* \<0.01)

Figure 6

**The proportion of various routes of HIV transmission in Shaanxi
province during four time periods: 2003--2005; 2006--2008; 2009--2011;
2012--2013.**

We classified HIV-1 infected individuals as CRF01_AE and non-CRF01_AE
groups according to the subtypes. As shown in Figure 7-A , a low level
baseline CD4 ^+^ T cell count was found among the CRF01_AE-infected
persons compared with the non-CRF01_AE patients infected through sexual
transmission (homosexual contact and heterosexual contact) ( *p* = 0.027
and *p* = 0.005, respectively); however, the CD4 ^+^ T cell count was
not lower compared with the non-CRF01_AE patients who were infected
through blood transmission ( *p* = 0.249). The CRF01_AE group was
associated with a higher viral load in patients who were infected
through sexual transmission (homosexual contact and heterosexual
contact) ( *p* = 0.0007 and *p* = 0.0044, respectively); however, the
viral load was not higher in the patients infected through blood
transmission ( *p* = 0.66) ( Figure 7-B ).

Figure 7

**The levels of CD4 ^+^ T cell count and viral load in CRF01_AE,
non-CRF01_AE infected patients through different transmission routes.**

A, The levels of CD4 ^+^ T cell count in CRF01_AE and non-CRF01_AE
infected patients through different transmission routes. A low level
baseline CD4 ^+^ T cell count was found among the CRF01_AE-infected
persons compared with the non-CRF01_AE patients infected through sexual
transmission; B, The levels of HIV viral load in CRF01_AE and
non-CRF01_AE infected patients through different transmission routes.
the CRF01_AE group was associated with a higher viral load in patients
who were infected through sexual transmission (homosexual contact and
heterosexual contact); however, the viral load was not higher in the
patients infected through blood transmission. The statistical
significance was calculated using the two independent samples
nonparametric tests (Man-Whitney U). \*, *p* \<0.05; \*\*, *p* \<0.01;
\*\*\*, *p* \<0.001; ns, no significant.

### Time trends in TDR

The overall TDR rate in this population was 4.4% (16 of 364 patients)
between 2003 and 2013. To assess the changes of the TDR prevalence over
time, the sequences were grouped into four sampling time periods
(2003--05, 2006--08, 2009--11, and 2012--13), according to the year of
HIV-1 diagnosis. The TDR prevalence to any antiretroviral class slightly
increased from the first period, peaked in 2006--08 (5.56%), decreased
afterwards, and became stable between 2009 and 2013 ( *P* = 0.982). (
Figure 8 ).

Figure 8

**Time trends in TDR among HIV-1 infected patients between 2003 to
2013.**

### Genotypic Analysis of DR

The proportion of sequences with resistance to NRTIs, NNRTIs, and PIs
was 2.2% (8/364), and 1.9% (7/364), and 0.5% (2/364), respectively. When
comparing resistance by drug class, dual class resistance was observed
in only 1 of the 364 cases (0.27%), and none of the patients presented
triple-class resistance. The PI-related mutations included I85V (0.27%,
n = 1) and M46I (0.27%, n = 1). Eight NRTI-related mutations were found,
including T69D (0.33%, n = 2), L74I (0.27%, n = 1), M184V (0.33%,
n = 2), L210W (0.27%, n = 1), T215S (0.27%, n = 1), and K219N (0.27%,
n = 1). The 7 NNRTIs-related mutations were K101E (0.27%, n = 1), K103N
(0.33%, n = 2), V106M (0.33%, n = 1), G190A (0.27%, n = 2). and G190E
(0.27%, n = 1). The demographic characteristics of these 16
treatment-naive individuals are shown in Table 4 . According to the
interpretation of the Stanford HIV Drug Resistance Database, the 16 drug
resistant viruses showed different levels of resistance to 11
antiretroviral drugs ( Table 5 ). The transmitted drug resistance to EFV
and NVP was significantly higher than that to the other drugs during the
study period. Although 2 NNRTIs (ETR and RPV) and 1 NRTI (FTC) were not
used in local patients, resistance to these agents is present, and this
resistance might be because of cross-resistance.

### Table 4

**Demographic characteristics of individuals infected by viruses
containing TDR mutations.**

ID

Gender

Age

Year Of Diagnosis

HIV-1 Subtype

Transmission route

CD4+ Count

Viral load

TDR mutation

PIs

NRTIs

NNRTIs

**CXA-018**

Male

25

2003

B

blood

46

194

**K103N**

**CXA-119**

Male

39

2005

B

heterosexual

8

5.82E+03

A71V

V106I **G190A**

**CXA-095**

Male

56

2006

B

blood

34

1.41E+07

A71T

**T69D**

**CXA-140**

Female

47

2007

B

heterosexual

13

2.25E+05

A71V

**V106M**

**JY102108**

Male

45

2009

CRF01_AE

blood

27

9.88E+04

V75L **M184V** T215A

V106I

**LPW103104**

Male

28

2009

CRF01_AE

homosexual

2

6.26E+05

**T69ADN**

**CXY101017**

Male

46

2010

CRF01_AE

heterosexual

31

9.89E+04

**G190E**

**JJ101013**

Male

31

2011

CRF01_AE

homosexual

390

1.01E+05

**M184V**

**K103N** V108I

**WJC**

Male

42

2011

CRF01_AE

homosexual

35

3.70E+06

L10V

**T215S**

**kang-007**

Male

24

2012

CRF01_AE

homosexual

106

1.65E+05

**L74I**

**kang-035**

Male

59

2012

B

heterosexual

17

1.44E+05

**K101E** E138K V179IT

**kang-003a**

Male

54

2013

B

heterosexual

29

5.63E+04

T69N

**G190A**

**kang-016a**

Male

34

2013

CRF01_AE

homosexual

83

3.48E+05

**M46I**

V179D

**kang-119**

Male

22

2013

CRF01_AE

homosexual

175

1.20E+03

**K219N**

**kang-128**

Male

23

2013

CRF07_BC

homosexual

362

4.23E+03

**L210W**

**kang-218**

Male

28

2013

CRF01_AE

unknown

146

3.57E+04

**I85V**

Open in a separate window

Bold letters: TDR mutations; PIs: protease inhibitors; NRTIs: nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors; NNRTIs: non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors;

### Table 5

**The levels of resistance to antiretroviral drugs from 16 individuals
with TDR strains.**

NO.

ID

Low-level resistance

Intermediate resistance

High-level resistance

1

CXA-018

EFV NVP

2

CXA-119

EFV

NVP

3

CXA-095

DDI

4

CXA-140

EFV NVP

5

JY102108

AZT TDF

ABC D4T

3TC FTC

6

LPW103104

DDI

7

CXY101017

ETR RPV

EFV NVP

8

JJ101013

ABC

3TC FTC EFV NVP

9

WJC

AZT D4T

10

kang-007

ABC

DDI

11

kang-035

EFV ETR

NVP

RPV

12

kang-003a

EFV

NVP

13

kang-016a

NFV

14

kang-119

15

kang-128

AZT D4T

16

kang-218

Open in a separate window

The baseline characteristics, including age, gender, transmission route,
CD4 ^+^ T-cell count, HIV-1 RNA viral load, and HIV-1 subtype, were
included in the univariate logistic regression model to determine
whether these factors were significantly associated with the presence of
TDR ( Table 6 ). The univariate model indicated that the only factor
associated with the presence of TDR was the CD4 ^+^ T cell level ( *p*
= 0.007). The patients classified as "≤100 cells/µL" were more likely to
harbor TDR than were the patients in the "101--350 cells/µL"
(OR = 0.195, 95% CI: 0.053 to 0.719) and the "\>350 cells/µL" CD4
(OR = 0.148, 95% CI: 0.032 to 0.686) groups. Because no other factors
were found to be significantly associated with TDR, the planned
multivariate regression model was not attempted.

### Table 6

**Univariate analysis of factors associated with the presence of HIV-1
TDR.**

Factors

OR

95% CI

*P*

*Global P*

**Gender**

**Male**

1

0.275

**Female**

0.321

0.042-2.476

0.275

**Age years**

0.495

≤25

1

26--35

0.553

0.134-2.281

0.412

36--45

0.593

0.128-2.740

0.503

\>45

1.417

0.364-5.519

0.616

**Transmission route**

0.980

Heterosexual contact

1

Homosexual contact

0.828

0.256-2.681

0.753

Blood transfusion

1.293

0.296-5.650

0.732

IDU

0.000

0.000

0.999

Unknown

1.141

0.125-10.382

0.907

**CD4 ^+^ T cell (cells/ul)**

0.007

≤100

1

101--350

0.195

0.053-0.719

0.014

\>350

0.148

0.032-0.686

0.015

**HIV RNA (copies/ml)**

0.974

≤1000

1

1001--10000

2.020

0.201-20.269

0.550

10001--100000

1.361

0.147-12.613

0.786

100001--1000000

1.636

0.190-14.072

0.654

\>1000000

1.784

0.155-20.586

0.643

**HIV-1 subtype**

0.118

CRF01_AE

1

CRF07_BC

8.872

1.119-70.347

0.039

B

6.860

0.787-59.783

0.081

Open in a separate window

CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio.



## Discussion

In the present study, we performed the first systematic study of HIV-1
molecular epidemiology and transmitted drug resistance in Shaanxi
province. Using the phylogenetic reconstruction and recombination
analysis, a total of eight HIV-1 subtypes, including B, C, G, and
CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC, CRF08_BC, CRF55_01B, and URFs, were detected. A low
level prevalence of HIV-1 TDR from 2003 to 2013 was identified. The TDR
rate to any antiretroviral class slightly increased from the first
period (2003--2005), peaked in 2006--08 (5.56%), then decreased
afterwards and became stable between 2009 and 2013.

Shaanxi province had a population of 38.3 million in 2010 according to
results of the sixth nationwide population census \[23\] . From 2011 to
2013, the cumulative number of reported HIV-1 and AIDS cases increased
each year, with the figures for each year standing at 2098, 3094 and
4332, respectively \[24\] . A previous study demonstrated that between
2002 and 2003, Thai-B was the most common genotype, followed by CRF07_BC
and CRF01_AE \[25\] . Our results are in agreement with these findings.
In our study, the predominance of subtype B decreased significantly from
2003 to 2013, and the predominance of CRF01_AE increased from 9.76% to
43.03% in the last decade, which showed a distinct genotypic profile
compared with other regions in China. For example, in the neighboring
Henan province, up to 92% of HIV-1 subtypes were Thai-B \[26\] ,
CRF08_BC was predominant and accounted for 59.8% of cases in Yunnan
province \[7\] , and CRF07_BC infection remained at a high prevalence in
Xinjiang province \[27\] .

The transmission routes of HIV-1 have changed dynamically over time.
While illegal and unsanitary blood collection practices have been
significantly reduced in Shaanxi, the number of persons infected with
HIV through MSM dramatically increased, suggesting that the trend of HIV
transmission is shifting from high-risk groups to the general
population. MSM was the most prevalent mode of transmission in Shaanxi
between 2012 and 2013. Nationwide epidemiologic surveys from the
National Center for AIDS/STD Control and Prevention have revealed that
among the newly diagnosed HIV-1 infections in 2013, 69.1% of cases could
be attributed to heterosexual transmission, and 20.8% could be
attributed to homosexual transmission \[28\] . Our finding is in
accordance with Beijing \[29\] , Shijiazhuang \[30\] , and Harbin \[31\]
surveillance, suggesting that MSM have become the most vulnerable
population to HIV-1 infection in some northern metropolitan areas of
China.

In this study, subtype B predominated among blood transmission, and
CRF07_BC predominated among IDUs. CRF01_AE was dominant in the MSM
group. These results are in agreement with other epidemiological
findings from different studies \[32\] -- \[33\] and suggest that the
HIV-1 subtype was associated with the transmission route. We observed
the highest viral diversity in MSM: five genotypes, consisting of four
recombinants and subtype B, were detected in this population. Subtypes
CRF55_01B and URFs (07BC/01AE) were first identified in Shaanxi. These
results suggest that the coexistence of multiple HIV-1 genotypes may
facilitate the generation of new recombination forms in MSM and make
HIV-1 genetics intricate.

A recent study suggested that the CRF01_AE subtype is associated with
higher viral load and faster progression from the estimated time of
seroconversion to AIDS compared with non-CRF01_AE subtypes in patients
infected through sexual transmission \[34\] . Another retrospective
study revealed that a low baseline CD4 ^+^ T cell count was found among
the CRF01_AE subtype compared with the CRF07_BC subtype in MSM \[35\] .
These findings suggest that the CRF01_AE subtype is associated with
progression to AIDS and advanced immunosuppression. However, they did
not address whether different risk populations are associated with
different results. Our observation in patients infected through sexual
transmission was in agreement with previous results; however, we did not
observe this trend in patients infected by blood transmission, which
suggests that the correlation between CRF01_AE and disease progression
could be different in various risk populations. Because the number of
IDUs is in our cohort was small, further studies will be performed to
evaluate the influence of the HIV subtypes on HIV progression in IDU
groups. Based on our results, we cannot get the conclusion that a lower
CD4 cell count has a causal relationship with CRF01_AE as patients
infected with a CRF01_AE subtype could have been diagnosed during a
later stage of their infection than those infected with non-CRF01_AE
subtype.

The overall TDR rate in this population remained low (\<5%) despite 10
years of the active introduction of ART in Shaanxi province, reflecting
the high efficacy of HAART in the last decade. The TDR rate between 2012
and 2013 was 4.24%, which was similar to the results from another study
in Yunnan (4.3%) \[15\] ; however, this was lower than the results from
studies in Henan (14.3%) \[26\] and Guangdong (6.7%) \[36\] . Similar
studies performed in the United States and in European countries
reported significantly higher prevalence (10.9% and 14.2%, respectively)
of TDR \[8\] -- \[9\] . Several factors might explain the observed
discrepancy. Shaanxi has a shorter history of using ART compared with
the developed areas or countries, where combination therapy has been
common since the late 1990s (North America, Europe). Additionally, the
high rates of acquired drug resistance could affect the prevalence of
TDR. In addition, the transmitted drug resistance could be potentially
underestimated due to the limited sample size.

A logistic regression analysis revealed that low CD4 ^+^ T cell counts
(below 100 cells/µL) were closely correlated with the development of
TDR. The median CD4 cell count was significantly lower among the
patients with TDR compared with the patients without TDR. This finding
is consistent with the results from the TREAT Asia and Hong Kong Studies
\[37\] -- \[38\] , supporting the hypothesis that patients with advanced
HIV-1 disease might be at greater risk of having HIV-1 TDR. Indeed, our
study is a cross-sectional observation, it has several limits to
identify the causal relationship between CD4 cell count and TDR. A
further follow-up study will be needed to elaborate this relationship.

There are some limitations to the present study. First, HIV-1 TDR
surveillance should be implemented in recently infected individuals,
because over time, the mutations might revert to wild-type transmitted
resistance variants (that might have reduced fitness capacity) or to the
nonresistant genotypes, which could affect the accuracy of transmitted
resistance surveillance \[39\] . Because recently infected persons are
difficult to recruit and late diagnosis of HIV infection is common in
china \[40\] , our studies included individuals who might have been
infected for a considerably longer time and are considered to be
"chronically infected". The results might be biased by the high
proportion of patients with low CD4 ^+^ T cell (≤200 cells/µL). The
degree of this bias will be affected by the time between HIV-1 infection
and diagnosis, which may have changed over time. Second, our testing was
based on population sequencing and might have missed minority variants
at levels \<20--25% of the virus population \[41\] .

Our study provided a timely update on the molecular epidemiology of
HIV-1 among the various risk populations in Shaanxi province. The
characteristics of transmitted drug resistance were described here for
the first time. These findings provide important information for
improving clinical practices and for policy-making.



## Acknowledgments

The authors thank their colleagues in the Department of Infectious
Diseases of Tang du hospital for their efforts in patient recruitment
and for providing blood samples. The authors appreciate the kind
assistance provided by Bing Chen (Beijing HUIHUACHEN science &
technology Co., Ltd).



## Funding Statement

This work was supported by the National Grand Program on Key Infectious
Disease Control (No. 2014ZX10001002, 2013ZX10001002-002-003), Tangdu
Technology Innovation and Development Program (No. 2012LCYJ002). The
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.



## Data Availability

The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully
available without restriction. All relevant data are within the paper.
All of the sequences obtained in this study were submitted to GenBank
with accession numbers KJ401414 to KJ401768, KJ364641 and KJ364642.

