# Characterization and frequency of a newly identified HIV-1 BF1 intersubtype circulating recombinant form in São Paulo, Brazil

Sabri Saeed Sanabani ,

^1,^ ^2^ Évelyn Regina de Souza Pastena , ^1,^ ^2^ Walter Kleine Neto ,
^1^ Vanessa Pouza Martinez , ^1,^ ^2^ and Ester Cerdeira Sabino ^1^

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC
Disclaimer



## Abstract

### Background

HIV circulating recombinant forms (CRFs) play an important role in the
global and regional HIV epidemics, particularly in regions where
multiple subtypes are circulating. To date, several (\>40) CRFs are
recognized worldwide with five currently circulating in Brazil. Here, we
report the characterization of near full-length genome sequences (NFLG)
of six phylogenetically related HIV-1 BF1 intersubtype recombinants
(five from this study and one from other published sequences)
representing CRF46_BF1.

### Methods

Initially, we selected 36 samples from 888 adult patients residing in
São Paulo who had previously been diagnosed as being infected with
subclade F1 based on *pol* subgenomic fragment sequencing. Proviral DNA
integrated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was amplified
from the purified genomic DNA of all 36-blood samples by five
overlapping PCR fragments followed by direct sequencing. Sequence data
were obtained from the five fragments that showed identical genomic
structure and phylogenetic trees were constructed and compared with
previously published sequences. Genuine subclade F1 sequences and any
other sequences that exhibited unique mosaic structures were omitted
from further analysis

### Results

Of the 36 samples analyzed, only six sequences, inferred from the *pol*
region as subclade F1, displayed BF1 identical mosaic genomes with a
single intersubtype breakpoint identified at the *nef* -U3 overlap (HXB2
position 9347-9365; LTR region). Five of these isolates formed a rigid
cluster in phylogentic trees from different subclade F1 fragment
regions, which we can now designate as CRF46_BF1. According to our
estimate, the new CRF accounts for 0.56% of the HIV-1 circulating
strains in São Paulo. Comparison with previously published sequences
revealed an additional five isolates that share an identical mosaic
structure with those reported in our study. Despite sharing a similar
recombinant structure, only one sequence appeared to originate from the
same CRF46_BF1 ancestor.

### Conclusion

We identified a new circulating recombinant form with a single
intersubtype breakpoint identified at the *nef* -LTR U3 overlap and
designated CRF46_BF1. Given the biological importance of the LTR U3
region, intersubtype recombination in this region could play an
important role in HIV evolution with critical consequences for the
development of efficient genetic vaccines.



## Background

The immense genetic variability of HIV-1 viruses is considered the key
factor that frustrates efforts to halt the virus epidemic and poses a
serious challenge to the development and efficacy of vaccines. Like
other human positive-sense RNA viruses, HIV has a high mutation rate as
a result of the error-prone nature of their reverse transcriptase (3 ×
10 ^-5^ mutations per nucleotide per replication cycle)\[ 1 , 2 \]. This
high rate of mutation coupled with the increased replication capacity of
the virus (10.3 × 10 ^9^ particles per day) \[ 3 \], allows for the
accumulation and fixation of a variety of advantageous genetic changes
in a virus population, which are selected for by the host immune
response and can resist newly evolving host defense. Recombination is
another potential evolutionary source that significantly contributes to
the genetic diversification of HIV by successfully repairing defective
viral genes and by producing new viruses \[ 4 \]. To date, HIV-1 viruses
are classified into four phylogenetic groups: M, O, N and P, which most
likely reflect four independent events of cross-species transmission
from chimpanzees \[ 5 - 7 \]. The M group (for main), responsible for
the majority of viral infection worldwide, is further subdivided into
nine subtypes (A-D, F-H, J and K), among which subtypes A and F have
been further classified into two sub-subtypes \[ 5 \]. Moreover, early
sequencing studies have provided evidence of recombination between
genomes of different HIV subtypes \[ 8 , 9 \]. Such interclade
recombinant strains are consistently reported from regions where two or
more clades are predominant. Recombinant strains from at least three
unlinked epidemiological sources, which exhibit identical mosaic
patterns, have been classified separately as circulating recombinant
forms (CRFs) \[ 10 , 11 \]. Currently, there are more than 40 defined
CRFs http://www.hiv.lanl.gov that are epidemiologically important as
subtypes \[ 12 \]. In addition to the known CRFs, a large number of
unique recombinant viruses, which are called unique recombinant forms
(URFs), have been characterized worldwide \[ 13 \]. Together, CRFs and
URFs account for 18% of incident infections in the global HIV-1 pandemic
\[ 12 \]. HIV-1 subtypes, CRFs and URFs show considerably different
patterns of distribution in different geographical regions \[ 12 , 14
\].

In Brazil, the number of persons living with HIV reached an estimated
number of 730,000 cases at the beginning of 2008 (2008 Report on the
Global AIDS Epidemic). Like in other European countries and in North
America, HIV-1 subtype B is a major genetic clade circulating in the
country. However, the existence of other subtypes such as F1, C, B/C and
B/F, has been consistently reported \[ 15 - 23 \]. Data from recent
studies of the near full length genomes (NFLG) of HIV have provided
evidence of Brazilian CRF strains designated as CRF28_BF, CRF29_BF,
CRF39_BF, CRF40_BF and CRF31_BC \[ 17 , 24 - 26 \]
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CRFs/CRFs.html .

In 2006, Thompson and colleagues \[ 27 \] published two NFLG of similar
BF1 mosaic viruses from patients in Rio de Janeiro 94BR-RJ-41 (GenBank:
AY455781 ) and 99UFRJ-16 (GenBank: AY455782 ). Here, we describe the
HIV-1 NFLG of an additional six isolates with similar BF1 mosaic genomes
from patients without evidence of direct epidemiological linkage.



## Methods

### Study population

The six samples reported in this study were from individuals residing in
São Paulo in the southeast region of Brazil and considered the most
populous city in South America. The rationale for selection of these
samples has been previously reported \[ 28 \]. The data, including age,
gender, number of CD4-positive T cells, and viral load were obtained
from medical records and shown in Table ​ Table1. 1 . No evidence of
direct epidemiological linkage could be established.

### Table 1

Characteristics of the six patients included in this study.

*Sample ID*

*Age/years*

*Sex*

*CD4 count, cells/mm* ^2^

*Viral load, copies/mL*

06BR_FPS561

44

F ^1^

81

721

07BR_FPS625

35

F

621

4734

07BR_FPS742

47

F

140

123617

07BR_FPS783

42

M ^2^

209

80751

07BR_FPS810

38

F

208

49240

------------------------------------------------------------------------

07BR_FPS812

45

F

362

5694

Open in a separate window

F; Female, M; Male

### Amplification and sequencing of HIV-1 DNA

The genomic DNA used for the PCR analyses was extracted using the QIAamp
blood kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer instructions. The NFLGs
from five overlapping fragments were obtained by PCR using the Platinum
*Taq* DNA polymerase (5 U/μl) (Invitrogen) and determined by a
previously reported method \[ 16 , 17 \]. To rule out the possibility of
*Taq* -generated recombinants, an additional PCR product of 670 bp,
which spans most of the viral LTR, was generated in separate PCR
reactions using previously described primers and conditions \[ 29 \].
All amplification reactions were done in duplicate to eliminate PCR
artifacts, ensuring that sequenced NFLG were not assembled from
heterogeneous DNA targets. To test for PCR carry over contamination,
extraction and PCR negatives were run in each experiment. Both
complementary DNA strands from each amplicon were directly sequenced by
cycle sequencing using a variety of internal primers, BigDye terminator
chemistry and *Taq* polymerase on an automated sequencer (ABI 3130,
Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA), essentially according to the
protocols recommended by the manufacturer. Fragments for each amplicon
were assembled into contiguous sequences on a minimum overlap of 30 bp
with a 97-100% minimal mismatch and edited using the Sequencher program
4.7 (Gene Code Corp., Ann Arbor, MI).

### Screening for recombination events and identification of breakpoints

Sequences were screened for the presence of recombination patterns by
the jumping profile Hidden Markov Model (jpHMM) \[ 30 \] and further
confirmed using the bootscanning method \[ 31 \] implemented by SimPlot
3.5.1 for Windows \[ 32 \]. The following parameters were used in this
method: window size, 250 bp; step size, 20 bp; the F84 model of
evolution (Maximum likelihood (ML)) as a model to estimate nucleotide
substitution; transition\\transversion ratio, 2.0; and a bootstrap of
100 trees. In addition, the significant threshold for the bootscan was
set at 90%. The alignment of multiple sequences, including reference
sequences representing subtypes A-D, F-H, J and K
http://hiv-web.lanl.gov , were performed by the CLUSTAL X program \[ 33
\] followed by manual editing in the BioEdit Sequence Alignment Editor
program \[ 34 \]. Gaps and ambiguous positions were removed from
alignment. Positions of crossover sites were defined based on the
distribution of informative sites supporting the two incongruent
topologies that maximize the χ ^2^ value \[ 35 \], a method implemented
in Simplot.

### Phylogenetic tree analysis

Phylogenetic relationships between the individual sequence types were
determined by two methods: the neighbor-joining (NJ) algorithm of MEGA
v.4 \[ 36 \] and the ML of PHYML v.2.4.4 \[ 37 \]. For NJ, trees were
constructed under the maximum composite likelihood substitution model
and bootstrap resampling was carried out 1000 times for analysis by the
MEGA software. ML phylogenies were constructed using the GTR + I + G
substitution model and a BIONJ starting tree. Heuristic tree searches
under the ML optimality criterion were performed using the NNI
branch-swapping algorithm. The approximate likelihood ratio test (aLRT)
based on a Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like procedure was used as a statistical
test to calculate branch support. Comparison of tree topologies between
subgenomic regions was performed using the algorithm described by Nye et
al \[ 38 \]. Trees were displayed using the program MEGA v.4 package.
The nucleotide similarities were estimated using the maximum composite
likelihood model implemented by MEGA v.4 software.

### GenBank accession numbers

GenBank accession numbers for the proviral NFLG sequences reported in
this study are (06BR_FPS561: HM026455 , 07BR_FPS625: HM026456 ,
07BR_FPS742: HM026457 , 07BR_FPS783: HM026458 , 07BR_FPS810; HM026459 ,
07BR_FPS812: HM026460 ).



## Results

### Recombinant Analysis

A total of six strains (06BR FPS561, 07BR FPS625, 07BR FPS742, 07BR
FPS783, 07BR FPS810, and 07BR FPS812) preliminarily classified as
subclade F1 by sequence analysis of a partial *pol* region were
corroborated by further phylogenetic analysis of the complete coding
sequences and part of the LTR region. Analysis of the proviral NFLGs
revealed all isolates retain intact reading frames for a majority of
their genes and no gross deletions or rearrangements were observed. The
NFLG sequence from each strain was initially investigated using jpHMM
which showed them to display identical mosaic structures with a single
intersubtype breakpoint identified at the *nef* -U3 overlap (HXB2
position 9347-9365). The recombinant genomes essentially consisted of
subclades F1 and B as parental sequences. Fragments identified as
subclade F1 were found to cover almost all of the genome coding regions
while fragment classified as subtype B consisted of a short sequence
comprising the last part of the 3\' LTR. Furthermore, the analysis also
revealed that all the six isolates had a mosaic sequence pattern nearly
identical to the previously published Brazilian BF1 isolates 94BR-RJ-41
(GenBank: AY455781 ) and 99UFRJ-16 (GenBank: AY455782 ). Based on these
preliminary analyses, we reanalyzed all six sequences using the
bootscanning method with three different subtype reference sequences
(subtype B, F and C) obtained from the full-length alignment of the HIV
sequence database http://hiv-web.lanl.gov . In agreement with the
results obtained by jpHMM, bootscanning analysis confirmed similar
mosaic structures with almost identical breakpoint positions within
these six isolates (Figure ​ (Figure1). 1 ). The BF1 intersubtype
transitions were estimated at nucleotides 9347-9365, based on the HIV
HXB2 numbering system, by mapping the informative site and χ ^2^
maximization. To further test for recombination, ML phylogenetic trees
were inferred for the regions of nucleotide sequence on either side of
the breakpoints detected by bootscan method (Figure ​ (Figure1). 1 ).
This analysis corroborates the results from the bootscan and thus
provided unambiguous evidence for a single recombination event supported
by high aLRT values among the six isolates.

Figure 1

**Phylogenetic relations between the parental regions of our six
recombinants** . The left part of the figure shows Bootscan results for
the recombinants compared to representatives of HIV-1 subtype B (green
line), F1 (red line) C (blue line) reference sequences. The right part
refers to the ML phylogenic-based regions between recombination
breakpoints as defined by bootscan plot. The recombinants are
highlighted with black circles. For clarity purposes, the trees were
midpoint rooted. The scale bar represents 0.01 nucleotide substitution
per site.

To rule out the possibility of *Taq* -generated recombinant artifacts,
an additional PCR product of 670 bp covering most of the viral LTR was
generated in a separate PCR reaction using previously described primers
and conditions \[ 29 \]. The results confirmed the recombination
breakpoint obtained using complete viral sequences.

### Phylogenetic analysis of regions bounded by the crossover sites

As shown in Figure ​ Figure2a, 2a , phylogenetic reconstructions for F1
specific regions bound by the crossover site, as defined by bootscan
analysis, were compared with representatives of all subtype and
sub-subtype references available in the HIV database (year 2008) and
with other subclade F1 published sequences. The result of the ML tree
revealed all our sequences clustered on a branch of subclade F1 and
further into one separate sub-branch intrinsic to South America,
particularly Brazil (100% aLRT). During analysis of the tree topology of
the F1 region depicted in Figure ​ Figure2a, 2a , all new sequences,
except isolate 06BR FPS561, formed a single cluster with two previously
published Brazilian isolates (F1.BR.01.01BR125 and F1.BR.01.01BR087)
supported by 100% aLRT values. Isolate 06BR FPS561 formed a rigid
subcluster (94% aLRT) with two strains (F1.JP.2004.DR6190 and
F1.JP.2004.DR6082) recently isolated in Japan and believed to be derived
from Brazil \[Tatsumi et al, unpublished study\]. Additionally, the
Brazilian isolates 94BR-RJ-41 and 99UFRJ-16 from Rio de Janeiro formed a
separate branch (\<90% aLRT) distinct from the other branches. To test
the stability and branching orders of the F1 fragment in our sequences,
ML trees were independently made from *gag-pol* and *env* sequences
using the same multiple genome alignment generated for the full length
of F1 fragment (Figure ​ (Figure3a 3a & 3b ). The phylogenetic trees from
both regions received an overall topological score of 78.5% according to
the algorithm of Nye et al \[ 38 \]. The computed topological score of
the clusters that include all our isolates except 06BR FPS561 in both
regions was 100%. Isolate 06BR FPS561 placed the *gag-pol* region within
the F1.JP.2004.DR6190, F1.JP.2004.DR6082, 07BR844 and 94BR-RJ-41 cluster
with an 84% of aLRT value, while *env* grouped with another subcluster
that included 06BR564 and 02BR082 (aLRT 94%). The computed topological
score of this cluster in both regions was 30% with a branch length
mismatch of 53.5%. Similarly, isolates 94BR-RJ-41 and 99UFRJ-16 changed
their topological positions over the *gag-pol and env* regions of their
genomes (aLRT \<90%). Thus, the shifting of topological positions of
isolate 06BR FPS561, 94BR-RJ-41 and 99UFRJ-16 into two different
phylogenetic trees is suggestive evidence of intrasubtype recombination
event or other factors, such as convergence. Furthermore, the
monophyletic cluster of isolates F1.JP.2004.DR6190 and F1.JP.2004.DR6082
depicted in Figure ​ Figure2a 2a was also supported in trees of both
subgenomic regions (Figure ​ (Figure3a 3a & 3b ).

Figure 2

**An exploratory ML tree calculated from fragments between breakpoints
of sequences identified in this study (indicated by black circles),
published sequences with identical breakpoints (indicated by triangle)
and reference sequences of subtype A-D, F-H, J and K
http://hiv-web.lanl.gov** . (A) Tree of the viral genomes corresponding
to the subclade F1 segments (HXB2 nucleotides 623-9347). (B) Tree of the
viral genomes corresponding to the subtype B segments in the LTR region
(HXB2 nucleotides 9348-9719). For clarity purposes, the tree was
midpoint rooted. The approximate likelihood ratio test (aLRT) values of
≥ 90% are indicated at nodes. The scale bar represents 0.05 nucleotide
substitution per site.

Figure 3

**Maximum likelihood tree of sequences identified in this study
(indicated by black circles), published sequences with identical
breakpoints (indicated by triangle) and reference strains inferred from
full-length *gagpol* (A) and *env* (B) reading frames** . For clarity
purposes, the tree was midpoint rooted. The approximate likelihood ratio
test (aLRT) values of ≥ 90% are indicated at nodes. The scale bar
represents 0.05 nucleotide substitutions per site.

The phylogenetic tree based on the fragment characterized as subtype B
by bootscan from all of the six isolates is shown in Figure ​ Figure2b.
2b . The resulting tree topology agrees with the accepted HIV-1 group M
phylogeny and the majority of the internal nodes are supported with high
aLRT values. Despite the fact that B fragments in these isolates have
shorter sequences and some group M variants cannot resolve some of the
internal nodes, all of them can resolve the terminal nodes.

### Molecular rate of CRF46_BF1

Five of the current six BF1 isolates described in this study (designated
as CRF46_BF1 in the Los Alamos database) were detected in 36 samples
selected from 888 samples infected with HIV-1 F1 based on *pol*
subgenomic fragment sequencing \[ 28 \]. Based on these results, the
molecular distribution of the CRF46_BF1 accounts for 0.56% of the HIV-1
circulating strains in São Paulo.

### Identification of Related HIV-1 Strains in the database

A search for similar recombination patterns in a sequence database
revealed the occurrence of three isolates from Brazil (GenBank: AY455781
; 94BR-RJ-41, AY455782 ; 99UFRJ-16 and DQ358801 ; 01BR087) and two
isolates from Japan (GenBank: AB480299 ; F1.JP.2004.DR6082 and AB480301
; F1.JP.2004.DR6190). It is to be noted that, as a result of our current
analysis, the sequences F1.JP.2004.DR6082, F1.JP.2004.DR6190, and
01BR087, which are characterized as pure subclade F1 \[ 17 \] \[Tatsumi
et al, unpublished study\], showed strong phylogenetic evidence for
recombination among subclade F1 and subtype B, suggesting that a revised
classification of these isolates in the GenBank and the HIV databases is
appropriate.

Next, we aimed to compare the recombinant profiles of our sequences to
other HIV BF1 genomes at the nucleotide level to illustrate the
distribution of their breakpoints. This was done by retrieving the
full-length genomes from all BF1 and CRF_BF1 isolates available in the
Los Alamos database. The automated jpHMM was used for mapping
breakpoints with significant recombination signal (Figure ​ (Figure4). 4
). Our analysis showed that two variants (GenBank: DQ085869 ; BREPM11931
and DQ085870 ; BREPM11931) annotated as BF1 recombinants in the
database, appear ancestral to subtype B strains. The recombination
mapping of the *nef* -U3 overlap detected in our sequences was also
found in CRF39_BF1 and four other URF BF1 recombinants. In addition,
most of the sequences have undergone multiple rounds of recombination
events. These data suggest that this part of the *nef* -U3 overlap is a
possible \'hot spot\' for recombination.

Figure 4

**Schematic representation of the NFLG structure and breakpoint profiles
of the sequences identified in this study and other BF1 URF and CRF
published sequences** . Sequences marked with the symbol (†) were
originally classified as pure F1 subclade. Sequences marked with the
symbol (\*) were originally classified as pure subtype B. The region of
subclade F1 and subtypes B are indicated at the bottom. Positions of
breakpoints are marked with grey arrowhead and numbered according to the
HXB2 sequence.

Fragment B from all six isolates shared 96% sequence identity with the B
stretch in the *nef* -U3 overlap from the Brazilian 93br029 which was
isolated in 1993. Thus, we assume that the initial recombination event
happened several years before 1993.

### Partial LTR nucleotides alignment features

A detailed scrutinization of the partial nucleotide alignment of the 3\'
LTR regions relative to HXB2 and consensus sequences of other HIV
subtypes (Year 2005) is shown in Figure ​ Figure5. 5 . Conform to the
consensus sequence GGGRNNYYCC, additional NF-κB binding sites were found
in three strains from the current study. A subclade F1 specific insert
of 13-15 \[ 39 \] nucleotides downstream of the NF-κB ^III^ binding site
was not observed in our sequences and added further support to our
results, indicating that our sequences are not genuine F1 sub-subtypes
but BF1 recombinant isolates. Absence of this nucleotide signature was
also observed in isolates F1.JP.2004.DR6082, F1.JP.2004.DR6190, and
01BR087, which have previously been classified as pure subclade F1
sequences.

Figure 5

**Alignment of the nucleotide sequences within the LTR region spanning
HXB2 positions -162 to +3 (GenBank accession number** K03455 **)** .
Dots indicate nucleotide identity to the HXB2 sequence and dashes (-)
represent gaps introduced to achieve the best alignment. Motifs present
in the HXB2 strain are underlined. Boxed sequences in subclade F1
isolates indicate the 13-15 nucleotide insertion.



## Discussion

In the present study, we have characterized six NFLG sequences that
posses mosaic genomic structure identical to the previously described
strains, 94BR_RJ_41 and 99UFRJ_16 with a genome of predominantly subtype
F1 and the *nef* -U3 overlap portion of the LTR of subtype B (Figure ​
(Figure1). 1 ). Moreover, three additional full-length genome sequences,
which were initially characterized as pure subclde F1, now clearly
appear to harbor a small fragment derived from subtype B in their LTR in
a position identical to the breakpoint reported in our sequences. In
phylogenetic tree of the full length and subgenomic regions of F1
subclade segment, isolates F1.JP.2004.DR6082 F1.JP.2004.DR6190
(recovered from japanese patients), 94BR-RJ-41 and 99UFRJ-16 (recovered
from patients residing in Rio de Janeiro) position outside the single
cluster formed by isolates 01BR087 and all BF1 recombinants identified
in this study, except 06BR FPS561 (recovered from patients residing in
São Paulo) (Figure ​ (Figure2a 2a & 3a ). The discordant branching
between *gag-pol* and *env* sequences of 06BR FPS561, 94BR-RJ-41 and
99UFRJ-16 isolates can be explained by the occurrence of another
recombination events after the spread of their common ancestor.
Generally, our results suggest that the 11 recombinant sequences were
not the result of one, but at least three independent recombination
events that produce similar simple recombinant structures. In
particular, BF sequences isolated in Japan and Rio de Janeiro may have
originated from different BF recombinant ancestors than those sequences
isolated in São Paulo. Thus, by excluding all the isolates that branch
out of the main cluster, we provide a total of 6 sequences (01BR087 and
5 sequences described in this study) that meet the formal requirement
for assigning a new CRF46_BF1. Again, in the phylogenetic tree of the F1
subclade fragment, the two recently isolated Japanese strains
(F1.JP.2004.DR6190 and F1.JP.2004.DR6082) formed a rigid subcluster with
isolate 06BR FPS561 and branch outside the subcluster formed by the
other five viruses described in this study, but still strongly position
within the main Brazilian subclade F1 sequences. This result suggests
that the viruses found in the Japanese patients share a distinct common
ancestry originating in Brazil. It is possible that the heavy traffic of
people from both countries across international borders could have
facilitated the spread of these viruses in both countries.

Based on the criteria of inclusion of the samples in this study, we were
able to show that the CRF46_BF1 accounts for 0.56% of the HIV-1
circulating strains in São Paulo, similar to the frequency of subclade
F1 reported from this region \[ 28 \]. The apparently low prevalence of
the CRF46_BF is ecological and may not be due to inherent properties of
the virus itself but rather to the chance results of subtype B (a
founder virus in Brazil), where it is introduced and consequently
established into our HIV infected population before the new CRF and
other subtypes are introduced.

Our analysis also showed that the recombination of subclade F1 with
subtype B at the *nef* -U3 overlap portion of the LTR appears to be a
recurrent finding because it has also been found in CRF39_BF1 and other
unique HIV-1 recombinants \[ 17 , 25 , 40 , 41 \]. In HIV, the existence
of recombinational hot spots is common given that they have been
described in cell-free systems \[ 42 \] and exists in the dimer
initiation sequence of the HIV-1 5\'-untranslated region and some
preferential sites across the viral genome \[ 43 - 46 \]. Several
studies have demonstrated that RNA hairpin structures strongly correlate
with recombination hotspots in various regions of the HIV-1 genome\[ 42
, 43 , 46 , 47 \]. Thus, based on the later mechanisms, it is possible
that hairpins promote recombination by hampering the RT during reverse
transcription or direct interaction with template \[ 46 , 48 , 49 \].

The HIV-1 LTR region is composed of various cis-acting regulatory
components needed for proviral DNA synthesis, integration of the nascent
viral cDNA into the host cell genome, transcription and modulation of
HIV genes expression \[ 50 , 51 \]. Early reports showed that the LTR
region is made up of three segments designated as U3, R and U5 \[ 52 \].
The U3 modulatory region entirely overlaps with *nef* \[ 53 \] and is
essentially required during reverse transcription for first template
transfer and integration of the provirus into the host genome. Moreover,
this region seems to regulate the transcription pathway of HIV viral
promoters by directly or indirectly interacting with a large number of
cellular proteins, including NF-AT, Ets-1, USF, AP-1, COUP and Sp1 \[ 54
\]. Thus, substitution through recombination of the *nef* -U3 overlap
portion of the LTR with that of a genetically different subtype, as in
our isolates, may affect the binding of both cellular and viral
transcription factors. In turn, this may influence viral transcription
levels, potentially enhancing the propagation of a recombinant virus
leading to the persistance of a circulating form.

Several studies reported successful results in inhibiting HIV-1
replication by using synthetic siRNAs targeting either viral RNA
sequences or cellular mRNAs encoding proteins that are critical for
HIV-1 replication \[ 55 - 58 \]. The study conducted by Yamamoto and his
colleagues \[ 59 \] showed a considerable sustainable suppression of HIV
replication and control of CC-chemokine production associated with *nef*
expression in HIV-1-infected macrophages following transfection of short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) by a lentivirus vector system expressing
HIV-specific shRNAs. These results allowed the authors to conclude that
lentivirus-vector-based RNA interference of the U3-overlapping region of
HIV-1 *nef* may have potential usefulness as a genetic vaccine against
HIV-1 infection. Furthermore, Ludwig and collaborator \[ 60 \] proved
that HIV-1 contains an antisense gene in the U3-R regions of the LTR
responsible for both an antisense RNA transcript and proteins. This
antisense transcript has tremendous potential for intrinsic RNA
regulation because of its overlap with the beginning of all HIV-1 sense
RNA transcripts by 25 nucleotides. The novel HIV antisense proteins
encoded in a region of the LTR that has already been shown to be deleted
in some HIV-infected long-term survivors and represent new potential
targets for vaccine development \[ 60 , 61 \].

Given the biological relevance described to the U3 region, it is
probable that the intersubtype recombination in this region could play
an important role in HIV evolution with critical consequences for the
development of efficient genetic vaccines.

During phylogenetic analysis, the B fragments of our six strains and the
other five strains (marked with a triangle symbol in Figure ​ Figure2b),
2b ), which showed identical mosaic genomic structures, were clearly
distinct from available South American subclade F1 sequences,
particularly of Brazilian origin. This result coupled with the absence
of the 13-15 nucleotides insertion downstream of the NF-κB ^III^ binding
site, which is typical for subclade F1, agrees with the interpretation
that the segment at the *nef* -U3 overlap portion of the LTR of the
eleven isolates originates from subtype B. Unlike the marked clustering
of the eleven isolates in the tree generated from the F1 fragment, the
tree of fragment B depicted in Figure ​ Figure2b 2b shows them to fall in
different sub-branches within subtype B reference sequences. This result
is most likely explained by the short lengths of the fragment B
sequences.



## Conclusion

In this study, we describe the NFLG sequence analysis from six HIV-1
isolates sampled from São Paulo and five other published isolates that
had an identical breakpoints between subclades F1 and B at the *nef* -U3
overlap portion of LTR. Six of these sequences (five from this study and
one from other published sequences) are currently classified as a member
of the CRF46_BF1 family. Our data is relevant to guide diagnosis and
vaccine development. We conclude that recombination is a potentially
important mechanism that significantly contributes to HIV genetic
variability with serious implications for diagnosis, drug treatment and
optimal vaccine development.



## Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.



## Authors\' contributions

SS conceived and designed the study, did the data analysis of the
sequences, and wrote the manuscript. ÉRP, WKN and VPM conducted the
characterization of the full-length genome analysis. ECS designed, wrote
the manuscript and directed the study. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.



## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants 06/50096-0, 2004/15856-9 and
2007/04890-0 from the Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de São
Paulo (FAPESP).

