# Low HIV-1 transmitted drug resistance in Bulgaria against a background of high clade diversity

## Abstract

Objectives

To determine transmitted drug resistance (TDR) and HIV-1 genetic
diversity in Bulgaria.

Methods

The prevalence of TDR and HIV-1 subtypes was determined in 305/1446
(21.1%) persons newly diagnosed with HIV/AIDS from 1988 to 2011. TDR
mutations (TDRMs) in protease and reverse transcriptase were defined
using the WHO HIV drug mutation list. Phylogenetic analysis was used to
infer polymerase ( *pol* ) genotype.

Results

TDRMs were found in 16/305 (5.2%) persons, 11 (3.6%) with resistance to
NRTIs, 5 (1.6%) with resistance to NNRTIs and 3 (0.9%) with resistance
to PIs. Dual-class TDRMs were found in three (1.0%) patients and one
statistically supported cluster of TDRMs comprising two individuals with
subtype B infection. TDRMs were found in 10 heterosexuals, 4 MSM and two
intravenous drug users. Phylogenetic analyses identified high HIV-1
diversity consisting of mostly subtype B (44.6%), subtype C (3.3%),
sub-subtype A1 (2.6%), sub-subtype F1 (2.3%), sub-subtype A-like (3.6%),
subtype G (0.3%), CRF14_BG (1.6%), CRF05_DF (1.3%), CRF03_AB (0.3%) and
unique recombinant forms (1.3%).

Conclusions

We found a low prevalence of TDR against a background of high HIV-1
genetic diversity among antiretroviral-naive patients in Bulgaria. Our
results provide baseline data on TDR and support continued surveillance
of high-risk populations in Bulgaria to better target treatment and
prevention efforts.





## Methods

### Ethics statement

All patients provided written informed consent to participate in this
study, which was approved by the Ethics Committee at the National Centre
of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases, Sofia, Bulgaria (NCIPD)
institutional review board (IRB) 00006384. The CDC IRB determined that
participant consent was not required for the analysis of sequences in
this study.

### Study design and specimen preparation

Blood samples were collected from 305 ART-naive persons out of 1446
patients diagnosed with HIV/AIDS in Bulgaria between 1998 and 2011 at
the National HIV Reference Laboratory and/or in the clinics responsible
for the management of patients with HIV in Sofia, Plovdiv and Varna.
Patients were from 29 different cities and various risk groups,
including heterosexual persons (HETs), MSM, intravenous drug users
(IDUs) and patients with other sexually transmitted infections (STIs).

Plasma samples were prepared at the National HIV Reference Laboratory as
previously described and stored at −80°C. ^\ \ 14^ Specimens were linked
to demographic and clinical data through an anonymous numerical code in
accordance with the ethics standards of Bulgaria.

### Sequence analysis

Plasma viral RNA was extracted using the MagCor Nucleic Acid Extraction
Kit (RBC Bioscience, Taiwan). Protease and reverse transcriptase
sequences of the HIV-1 *pol* gene were generated using the TruGene DNA
Sequencing System (Siemens Healthcare, USA) following the
manufacturer\'s protocol. ^\ \ 14^ HIV-1 drug resistance mutations were
determined according to the WHO 2009 Surveillance Drug Resistance
Mutations (SDRM) list ^\ \ 15^ using the current Calibrated Population
Resistance tool v5.0 of the Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance
Database ( http://cpr.stanford.edu/cpr.cgi ). Nucleotide substitution
models and alignments for phylogenetic analyses were prepared using
MEGA5 ^\ \ 16^ and contained the Bulgarian *pol* sequences along with
reference sequences from the Los Alamos HIV database. ^\ \ 17^ All 23
resistance mutation codons were manually removed from the alignment to
exclude the possibility of convergent evolution.

Phylogenetic relationships and subtypes were inferred using Bayesian
analysis with BEAST v1.8.0. ^\ \ 18^ Two independent 100 × 10 ^6^ Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) generations were used with sampling every
10 000th generation. Statistical support was assessed with posterior
probabilities. MCMC convergence was assessed by effective sampling size
\>200 using Tracer v1.6. The maximum clade credibility tree was chosen
from the posterior distribution of 10 000 sampled trees after burning in
the first 1001 sampled trees with the program TreeAnnotator v1.8.0.
HIV-1 subtypes were also inferred using the internet-based tools REGA
and COMET as described in our previous study. ^\ \ 14^

Potential epidemiological clusters were defined using a stringent set of
criteria and included those sequences grouping together with posterior
probabilities ≥0.97 and sharing \>90% nucleotide identity per total
sampling period between related sequences analysed.

Recombination was investigated using bootscan analysis in the program
SimPlot v3.5 with an F84 nucleotide substitution model, a 200 bp sliding
window, a 40 bp step and the transition/transversion ratio determined
empirically. ^\ \ 19^

### GenBank accession numbers

JQ259060, JQ259075, JQ259077, JQ259078, JQ259085, JQ259088, JQ259089,
JQ259092-JQ259094, JQ259097-JQ259100, JQ259103, JQ259104, JQ259109,
JQ259112-JQ259117, JQ259119, JQ259120, JQ259122-JQ259129,
JQ259131-JQ259147, JQ259149-JQ259153, JQ259155, JQ259157-JQ259184 and
KJ765390-KJ765610.


## Results

### Low prevalence of genotypic TDRMs in Bulgaria

Three hundred and five of 1446 (21.1%) HIV-1-infected persons naive to
ART participated in our study. The majority of persons (79.3%) were male
and the potential infection routes included HET (42.6%), IDU (27.5%),
MSM (26.9%), mother-to-child (1.6%), MSM/IDU (1.0%) and blood
transfusion recipients (0.3%) (Table 1 ). Infection was also distributed
across other groups, including previous prisoners (12.8%), sex workers
(3.0%), persons with other STIs (2.0%), pregnant women (3.3%) and blood
donors (6.2%). The majority of patients (89.8%) reported likely
acquiring infection in Bulgaria.

The overall rate of TDRMs in this population was 5.2% (16/305); those
with TDRMs comprised 13 (4.3%) men and 3 (0.9%) women (Table 2 ). Eleven
of the 305 (3.6%) had resistance to NRTIs, 5/305 (1.6%) had resistance
to NNRTIs and 3/305 (0.9%) had resistance to PIs. The most prevalent
mutations were T215C/D/S, M41L, K219Q and F77L for NRTIs; Y181C, K103N,
V106M and G190E for NNRTIs, and D30N, N88D and M46L for PIs.


Thirteen of the 16 patients (81.3%) with TDRMs had single-class TDRMs,
while dual-class TDRMs were identified in 3/16 (18.8%); all three were
men, two of whom were MSM and one was HET. Two patients had both NRTI
and PI mutations and one had NRTI and NNRTI resistance mutations (Table
2 ). TDRM prevalence across risk groups was highest among HETs (10/130,
7.7%), followed by MSM (4/82, 4.9%) and IDUs (2/84, 2.4%). TDRMs were
found in 5/31 (16.1%) patients who reported likely HIV-1 infection while
travelling or living abroad and in persons with different non-B HIV-1
subtypes (Table 2 ). TDRMs were not detected in samples from sex
workers, blood transfusion recipients, STI patients, pregnant women or
HIV-1-positive newborns.

### High HIV-1 diversity in drug-naive patients

Phylogenetic analysis showed broad HIV-1 diversity in drug-naive
patients in Bulgaria. One hundred and thirty-six infections (44.6%) were
subtype B, 61 (20.0%) CRF01_AE, 57 (18.7%) CRF02_AG, 11 (3.6%) subtype
A-like, 10 (3.3%) subtype C, 8 (2.6%) sub-subtype A1, 5 (1.6%) CRF14_BG,
7 (2.3%) sub-subtype F1, 4 (1.3%) CRF05_DF, 4 (1.3%) unique recombinant
forms (URFs), 1 (0.3%) CRF03_AB and 1 (0.3%) subtype G (Figure 1 and
Table 3 ). Of the 11 A-like sub-subtypes, 10 were found in the current
study and one sequence was previously reported. ^\ \ 14^ Partial
polymerase sequences from this subtype were analysed in detail
previously and will require further characterization using complete
genomes. ^\ \ 14^


Inferred subtypes and phylogenetic relationships of Bulgarian HIV-1
polymerase sequences. The 715 bp alignment was composed of 305 HIV-1
sequences from Bulgaria and 157 reference sequences of all HIV-1
subtypes and complex recombinant forms (CRFs) available in the Los
Alamos HIV 2010 database. Bayesian inference was performed using BEAST
v1.8.0. The general time-reversible model with discrete gamma and
invariant among-site rate variation, a lognormal relaxed clock model and
a constant coalescent tree prior was used. Two independent 100 × 10 ^6^
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) generations were used with sampling
every 10 000th generation. Statistical support for the best inferred
trees was assessed with posterior probabilities. Black, blue and red
branches indicate reference, Bulgarian and Bulgarian sequences with
TDRMs, respectively. Blue background indicates phylogenetic clusters
with posterior probabilities ≥0.97 and within-clade nucleotide
identities \>90%.

We also found broad genotypic diversity in persons with TDRMs, including
6/16 (37.5%) subtype B, 4/16 (25%) CRF01_AE, 2/16 (12.5%) subtype A1,
1/16 (6.3%) subtype A-like, 1/16 (6.3%) CRF02_AG, 1/16 (6.3%) CRF14_BG
and 1/16 (6.3%) subtype C (Figure 1 and Table 2 ).

### Identification of subtype and TDRM clusters

Phylogenetic analysis inferred 32 strongly supported clusters (Figure 1
); the largest consisted of 52 CRF01_AE sequences, most of which were
from IDUs living in Sofia. More than a third of the patients in the
large CRF01_AE cluster reported previous imprisonment. We also
identified two clusters of CRF02_AG sequences, most of which were from
IDUs living in Plovdiv. Almost a third of the patients in the CRF02_AG
cluster also reported a history of imprisonment. Fifteen subtype B
clusters were found, mostly from MSM living in the capital city of
Sofia. HET patients were also present in two of these MSM clusters.

Of sixteen sequences with TDRMs, only two subtype B sequences (patients
08BG460 and 11BG1119) clustered together with strong phylogenetic
support (posterior probability = 1.0) and 99% nucleotide identity,
suggesting an epidemiological link with this HET--MSM pair (Figure 1 and
Table 2 ). These two patients had dual-class TDRMs to NRTI (M41L and
T215D) and PI (D30N and N88D), which may have lasted for 3 years (Table
2 ) or have been transmitted by a third person not tested in our study.

Most clusters contained sequences with relatively short branch lengths
in the phylogenetic tree, suggestive of a short evolutionary history and
relatively recent infection (Figure 1 ). Although there were no data
available for determining the date of infection, most of the patients\'
blood specimens were collected shortly after HIV/AIDS diagnosis; 49.8%
of the patients\' specimens were analysed the same year as diagnosis,
36.1% between 1 and 3years after diagnosis, and 14.1% ≥4years after
diagnosis.


## Discussion

Although HIV-1 was introduced \>28 years ago into Bulgaria, which has
one of the highest HIV infection rates per million persons of the Balkan
countries, very little is known about the characteristics of the
epidemic. ^\ \ 20^ Assessment of TDRMs and viral diversity is a key
factor in monitoring the HIV-1 epidemic and optimizing first-line
therapy for long-term management of HIV-1 infection in Bulgaria.
^\ \ 21^ Here we found that TDRMs and HIV-1 diversity in Bulgaria differ
from those in other European and Balkan countries. The 5.2% TDRM
prevalence in Bulgaria is about half of that we previously reported
^\ \ 13^ and that reported across Europe (10.9%), ^\ \ 5^ and is
generally less than that of the majority of neighbouring Balkan
countries (4.7%--21.8%). ^\ \ 8--12^ In Western Europe, a 10% TDRM rate
was reported and is higher in MSM, ^\ \ 5\ ,\ \ \ 7^ which may be due to
the fact that in Western Europe HIV-1 was initially introduced and
transmitted among MSM, who have the longest history of treatment with
antiretroviral drugs and who thus typically have more TDRMs. In
contrast, the lower TDRM prevalence in Bulgaria may reflect the fact
that HIV-1 was first introduced among HETs in Bulgaria from persons
travelling mostly in non-Western European countries, who have lower TDRM
rates. ^\ \ 14^ The decrease in TDRM seen in drug-naive patients in our
current study compared with that reported in 2008 is a likely result of
identifying only 2/22 HAART-naive persons in the initial study. TDRMs
were present in about one-third of persons reporting acquiring infection
abroad, demonstrating that TDRMs and a variety of subtypes are being
imported into Bulgaria. Lately, the HIV-1 epidemic in Bulgaria has seen
dramatic prevalence increases in MSM and IDUs, which may cause a future
increase in TDRMs in IDUs and MSM with the concomitant introduction of
TDRMs into other risk groups. Indeed, in our study we identified one MSM
and one HET infected with subtype B with identical dual-class TDRMs,
suggestive of possible spillover from MSM into HET risk groups. TDRM
clusters in MSM and IDUs have also been reported in outbreaks in
neighbouring Balkan countries. ^\ \ 9\ ,\ \ \ 22--24^

As in our previous report, ^\ \ 13^ most TDRMs concerned RTIs, including
those in patients with dual resistance. The majority of patients had
non-polymorphic mutations selected by the thymidine analogues zidovudine
and stavudine, including M41L and K219Q. The revertant TDRMs T215C/D/S
were also found in five patients. These mutations usually occur in
individuals primarily infected with strains containing the primary
resistance mutation T215Y/F, which can also be transmitted. The common
NRTI resistance mutation V75M, which occurs predominantly in CRF01_AE
infection, was found in one patient with this subtype. Five patients,
each infected with a different subtype, three of whom reported acquiring
infection abroad, had NNRTI TDRMs. In this study we found E138G/A/D/K
variants that are related to rilpivirine resistance. However, these
mutations are also encountered as polymorphisms and are therefore not
considered a certain indicator of transmitted resistance according to
the definition used by the WHO. ^\ \ 15^ Three patients had PI TDRMs,
although PI TDRMs were not observed in our previous study. ^\ \ 13^ One
individual was infected with an HIV-1 A-like subtype with the M46L
mutation selected by various PIs. Sequences from two other patients
infected in Bulgaria had the D30N and N88D mutations, both of which are
selected by nelfinavir and commonly occur together but have little
clinical impact on first-line therapy. Although nelfinavir has not been
used in clinical practice for years, these two mutations had already
been detected in Bulgaria in our previous study ^\ \ 13^ and one of
these two patients was diagnosed in 2004 when nelfinavir was still in
use.

Analysis of the geographical distribution of TDRMs showed that half of
the cases were found in two major cities, Sofia and Plovdiv, where the
largest number of HIV-1 patients in our study were registered. However,
TDRMs were also identified in persons from five cities in remote
locations across Bulgaria, demonstrating that TDRMs are widespread in
the country, though the overall prevalence is low. In addition, about
one-third of TDRM cases were found in individuals reporting they
acquired infection abroad, suggesting that some TDRMs are likely being
imported into Bulgaria.

As in our prior studies, phylogenetic analyses revealed a high HIV-1
diversity, with over half (54.4%) of the sequences defined as non-B
subtypes, compared with most European countries (66.1%), ^\ \ 25^
including most neighbours in the Balkan region except Romania and
Albania, where the most prevalent subtypes are F1 (80.3%) and A1
(56.1%), respectively. ^\ \ 9\ ,\ \ \ 14\ ,\ \ \ 20\ ,\ \ \ 26^ After
subtype B, CRF01_AE and CRF02_AG were the second most prevalent strains,
with the highest rate of these two CRFs reported in the Balkans.
^\ \ 20^ The remaining 16.7% of HIV-1 infections consisted of at least
10 different subtypes. The subtypes were not evenly distributed amongst
the various risk groups; nearly 90% of subtype B viruses were found in
men and the majority were MSM. These results are consistent with the
HIV-1 epidemic in Western Europe ^\ \ 5\ ,\ \ \ 8\ ,\ \ \ 20^ and with
those from our previous study in Bulgaria. ^\ \ 14^ In contrast,
CRF01_AE and CRF02_AG were found mostly in IDUs. Most likely, recent
introduction and rapid dissemination of different HIV-1 strains in IDUs
has contributed to the increase in these two subtypes in Bulgaria, as
previously observed. ^\ \ 27^ In contrast, most infections with subtypes
A1, F1, C, CRF14_BG and CRF05_DF and URFs were found in HETs, including
CRF03_AB, and have had limited spread to date. This is the first report
in Bulgaria of this HIV-1 subtype, which circulates in Russia, former
Soviet Union countries and neighbouring Turkey. ^\ \ 28\ ,\ \ \ 29^
Interestingly, ∼25% of the minor subtypes found in our study were likely
acquired outside Bulgaria, suggesting that there have been multiple
introductions of rare HIV-1 subtypes from immigrants.

We did not find an association between time from diagnosis and TDR in
our study; however, the numbers of resistance mutations found are too
low for statistically supported associations.

Our findings are limited by inclusion of persons who were not followed
longitudinally to determine whether TDRMs persist or revert to WT virus,
which might influence the level of observed TDRMs in persons from whom
samples were collected \>1year after diagnosis. This is especially
relevant for comparisons with results from Western countries, where
genotyping and drug resistance testing occurs at the time of diagnosis.
Also, the results from a cross-sectional study design may not be truly
representative of the other 80% of reported cases in Bulgaria. For
example, a comparison of demographic and epidemiological characteristics
of the subset of patients ( *n* = 305) studied in the current report and
all HIV-1-diagnosed persons ( *n* = 1446) in Bulgaria showed that the
numbers of TDRMs in MSM and persons acquiring HIV-1 abroad may have been
overestimated (Table 1 ). The effect of this possible sampling error in
our analyses may also influence subtype distribution in different
populations. The findings may also be limited by the use of only
standard population-based sequencing, which may not detect minority
TDRMs present at \<20% of the viral population in plasma. ^\ \ 15^
Finally, self-reporting of epidemiological data used in this study could
introduce recall biases, especially for those reporting infection abroad
or non-MSM, which could affect the subtype prevalence by country of
origin or route of HIV-1 transmission.

### Conclusions

We found low TDRM prevalence and high viral diversity in
treatment-naive, HIV-1-infected persons in Bulgaria. The contribution of
TDRMs and genetic diversity acquired outside Bulgaria by migrants and
the increasing number and size of local transmission clusters in
high-risk groups raises public health concerns. Combined, our findings
provide baseline TDRM data and support the need for further surveillance
of TDRMs and viral diversity in Bulgaria, especially in high-risk
populations such as those involved in the emerging MSM and IDU
sub-epidemics.

